





                        THE SUNNY SOUTH OÖLOGIST.

  Vol. 1, No. 2.   Gainesville, Texas, April, 1886.   Published Monthly.
                                                      50 Cents per Year.




                    Notes from Southern California.


We have been having a bountiful share of rain in this neighborhood of
late; and while we have been having warm drenching rains in the low
lands, there has been a steady fall of snow in the mountains. As a
result of the latter fact large numbers of Cedarbirds, Robins, Catbirds,
etc., have left their usual haunts (the mountains), and taken refuge in
our warm orange groves and vineyards. And now a person cannot walk a
mile through the suburbs of the town, without noticing several large
flocks of these birds feeding contentedly by the roadside, or
industriously probing among decayed limbs, or under dead leaves for bugs
and larvæ, upon which they delight to feed. These birds however do not
breed in this locality, but as soon as the warm weather sets in, they
betake themselves to the remote valleys and fastnesses, situated among
the almost inaccessible ranges of the Sierra Madre. Here all are
protected from the ravages of that “fell egg-destroyer,” the school-boy.
They breed and rear their young in peace, and we see no more of them
until the next “cold spell” sets in and causes them to again visit us,
or properly speaking, “our warm climate,” until the clemency of the
weather will again permit them to return to their accustomed haunts.
Further north however these birds can be found among the woods and
forests the whole year ’round.

At this season of the year we are not alone favored with visits of the
land birds, but the aquatic element is very abundantly and variously
represented among our ponds and streams; in fact, out of a bag of twenty
or thirty ducks, which a hunter may be so fortunate as to secure as a
reward for a day’s sport, he can generally single out from twelve to
fifteen different species, from the majestic old Mallard or “Greenhead,”
to the diminutive Butterball or “Silkduck.” Quite a number of these
ducks remain with us during the breeding season; in fact I have
personally obtained “sets” of eggs of the Cinnamon Teal, Baldpate,
Mallard, Ruddy Duck, Godwall, Redhead, Pintail and Greenwinged Teal;
besides I have heard several authentic accounts of “sets” of some other
species of ducks being secured by other Oologists in different portions
of this county. The principal or most profitable grounds on which to
successfully search for nests of various species of ducks and other
waterfowl is amongst the immense “tule lands” and sloughs of a marsh
called “Gospel Swamp.” This is a place about sixty miles from Los
Angeles, and occupying many square miles of country, including the bogs,
willow swamps, tidelands, etc. It is a veritable paradise for ducks of
all species; and during the sporting season I have spent some very
pleasant and well repaid time, by trudging around its extremities, armed
with a good ten-bore “breech-loader,” with an evil intent upon the
unsuspecting ducks and geese. Not withstanding the thousands and
thousands of birds annually slaughtered in these swamps by the
professional “pot” or market hunters, as well as the havoc wrought by
amateur sportsmen, still the number of the birds never decrease to a
perceptible extent; but, like the “Hydra,” where you kill one to-day,
you will find two to-morrow. Along towards spring the birds begin to
assemble together in vast flocks of countless thousands, and depart for
unknown latitudes in the “far north.” Their time of departure seems to
be invariably during the night; in fact I have often noticed large
numbers of ducks assembling at the same given lake or pond. This
congregating would perhaps occupy a lapse of several days, the numbers
apparently augmented by large additions each succeeding night. At
length, after a vast number has congregated, you will notice a great
deal of excitement among the large flocks; a seeming dissatisfaction and
restlessness, evinced by loud calls and continual fluttering, splashing,
etc. After all these signs of busy life, if you visit the lake the next
morning you will probably find it lonely and deserted, without a vestige
of yesterday’s tumult and life, save a few lonely, sick looking Teals,
who were too weak or tired perhaps to join the flight of their fellows
the preceding night. But they may wait for the next flight which at once
begins to form, with new additions each succeeding night, and in a few
days we have an exact repetition of the assemblage and flight of a few
days previous. The assembling of these birds is usually at some large
lake convenient for their purpose, and the additions in the shape of
small straggling flocks, are very probably detachments of ducks which
have left the small ponds and streams, where they have passed the winter
in detached flocks, and as if by some previously concerted plan assemble
here so as to take their departure _en masse_ for the possible view of
both company and protection.

                                                          A. M. Shields,

Los Angeles, Cal.




                         North American Birds.


I will hereafter give in this column each month, as near as possible,
the breeding places, and the time of nesting of the Birds of North
America; beginning this month with the family Turdidae.

1. Wood Thrush—Hylocichla Mustelina—Nests usually found in low, damp
woods. Dates of nesting, from May 10th to June 15th.

2. Wilson’s Thrush—Hylocichla fuscesceus—The situation of the nest is
retired, and often in the depths of woods. Begins nesting about May
20th.

3. Gray-cheeked Thrush—Hylocichla aliciae—Low, damp woods and thickets.
Begins nesting about May 1st.

4. Russet-backed Thrush—Hylocichla ustulata—Pacific coast regions
abundant. Begins nesting about May 15th.

4a. Olive-backed Thrush—Hylocichla ustulata swainsoni—Dry, scrubby
woods. Begins nesting about June 1st.

5. Dwarf Thrush—Hylocichla unalascae—Thick woods and swamps. Begins
nesting early in May.

5b. Hermit Thrush—Hylocichla unalascae pallasi—Low, swampy places.
Begins nesting June 1st.

7. American Robin—Merula Migratoria—Nests made near habitations. Nests
from May 1st to July 25th.

7a. Western Robin—Merula Migratoria propinqua—Nesting habits similar to
that of No. 7.

9. Varied Robin—Hesperocichla naevia—Inhabits all woodland. Begins
nesting about May 10th.

10. Sage Thrasher—Oreoscoptes montanus—Inhabits open, mountainous
countries. Begins nesting May 15th.

11. Mocking Bird—Mimus polyglottus—Nests placed in open country,
orchards, vineyards, etc. Always near man. Begins nesting April 20th.

12. Catbird—Galeoscoptes carolinensis—In gardens or clearings of woods,
always near habitations. Nests May 15th to July 1st.

13. Brown Thrasher—Harporhynchus rufus—In blackberry tangle or thickets,
high or low land. May 10th to June 20th.

13a. Mexican Brown Thrasher—Harporhynchus rufus longirostris—Nesting
places similar to foregoing species. Nests April 15th to June 15th.

14. Saint Lucas Thrasher—Harporhynchus cinereus xantus—Uplands and high
plains, in cactus and other bushes. Begins nesting about May 1st.

14a. Bendire’s Thrasher—Harporhynchus cinereus bendirei—Uplands and high
plains. Begins nesting April 1st.

15. Curve-billed Thrasher—Harporhynchus curvirostris—Inhabits thick
woods. Nest from May 1st to June 15th.

15a. Palmer’s Thrasher—Harporhynchus curvirostris palmeri—Desert regions
of Arizona. Begins nesting about the 10th of May.

16. California Thrasher—Harporhynchus redivivus—Coast region of
California, in a clump of bushes, or dense chaparral. Begins nesting
early in February.

16a. Leconte’s Thrasher—Harporhynchus redivivus lecontei—Frequents open
countries. Begins nesting early in April.

17. Rufus-Vented Thrasher—Harporhynchus crissalis—Common in chapparral
thickets, and well shaded undergrowths. Begins nesting early in April.

                             (_Continued._)




                      Egg Collecting in Colorado.


On a pleasant morning in the early part of May last, (May 2, 1885) our
collector put his gun, collecting-box, etc., into the buckboard, and
started for a point 16 miles below Greeley, on the Platte. The
destination was a long island midway in the Platte while on either side
was the rushing, dirty river. This island was noted among the boys of
the neighborhood as a great resort for crows, owls, herons and other
large birds during the breeding season; but, owing to the river being
high in the spring of the year few have ever cared to reach the island
for such “trifles as bird’s-eggs.” ’Twas too early for herons’ eggs, too
late for owl’s, but just the time for crows. The latter we were after,
and crows’ eggs we determined to have. The sight of a few nests in the
trees on the island, and several crows flapping about, worked our
desires to the highest pitch. Stripping and holding all necessary
articles to take crow’s eggs with in one hand, we partly waded and swam
across the wild and dirty stream to the crow-den shores. In a short
space of time I took 11 sets of 6 eggs, and 3 of 5 each from nests from
12 to 20 feet from the ground, all eggs were perfectly fresh. Once I
thought I had a set of Raven’s eggs (280), as they were larger than the
average crow’s, and my aid shot a female raven as she left the nest. It
must have been a mistake however on _her_ part and I have since given up
the idea.

I flushed an American Long-Eared owl (395) off of an old crow’s nest
about 8 feet from the ground, and obtained a handsome set of 6 eggs. It
was so late in the season for owl’s eggs that I was afraid they would
hatch out before I could get them to the ground. On blowing them I was
much surprised to find them all perfectly fresh. Has any one ever taken
a fresh set of 395 as late as this?

Also took one set of B. B. magpies (286) 5 eggs, incubation well
advanced; nest 6 feet from the ground. We saw several herons busily
fixing up their old nests in the high tops of a large cottonwood, but we
never get fresh heron’s eggs until the last of May.

                                                          Fred M. Dille,

Greeley, Colorado.




                   Nesting of Brown-headed Nuthatch.


                            (SITTA PUSSILLA)

All the accounts I have seen in books say the brown-headed nuthatch
builds no nest, but lays her eggs in the bottom of a hollow in the tree
on the decayed wood. Now, I have never found one that did not make an
attempt to build a nest. I have found several, ranging from two to forty
feet from the ground, and in every case a nest was built, composed of
fibrous roots, pieces of hanging moss, hair and feathers mixed together.
The nests were built in a hollow in a decayed tree, from one foot to
three feet deep. The nest is very loosely put together, and it is
impossible to remove it without cutting the cavity open to the bottom of
the nest. A gentleman in California, who is well versed in Ornithology
and Oology, who I wrote to in regard to it, says his knowledge and
experience has been in almost every case, that a nest is attempted by
this bird—the description of a nest taken by him in Orange county, Fla.,
some years ago is—the nest was composed of pieces of fibrous, decayed
wood, small scales of pine bark, wings of pine seeds, and a little
woolly vegetable material arranged in cup form.

                                                               G. Noble,

Savannah, Georgia.




                           A Bird’s Sagacity.


For the Sunny South Oologist:

The following little narrative occurred at my old home in Kentucky, some
years ago: I had placed over the roof of my house a bird box, and for
several years the martins had occupied it, and I think the same pair
came back every year, for the male appeared larger and had a coarser
voice (?) than any others I had ever heard.

This spring of which I speak, the blue birds had taken possession of the
box, and one morning while out for a little fresh air I heard the
welcomed voice of the martin in the distance. I turned to see from where
the voice came, and saw the old friend coming alone. He came directly to
the bird box, and appeared very much surprised to find it occupied, so
at once began an attack upon the inmates, but the little birds were too
much for the old martin, and he had to give up to them. (But this was
only for a short time.) So he flew to a neighboring roof, and sat there
for a time as if meditating what to do, and then flew in a direct line
toward the south from whence he had come. The little blue birds seemed
to congratulate themselves upon their victory, but they were too soon,
for the next morning at about the same time, I heard the voice which
seemed to say “pitch in, pitch in,” and I knew he was coming. Upon
looking I saw him in the lead with about a dozen other martins
following. I waited to see his purpose, and was not long in finding it
out, for he flew direct to the bird box, and perching himself on the top
gave the orders, “Pitch in! pitch in!” and they did pitch in from both
sides.

                            * * * * * * * *

It is needless to say how it terminated, for the old martin and his mate
raised a brood that year, and came year after year until I came west.

                                                           L. L. Howard,

Gainesville, Texas.


A Georgia paper says that before the war there was a bird in the south
that fed exclusively on cockle-burrs. At a certain season of the year
these birds would sweep down on the fields and when they departed not a
burr remained. The smell of burnt and burning powder for four years
seems to have been too much for the burr-eaters. Since then not a bird
of the kind is to be found in the south; but the burrs are here yet.




                              Early Finds.


I think I will enter the lists in competition for “earliness.” I opened
the ball on January 30th, 1886, by taking a set of three of the Great
Horned Owl, incubation advanced. Who can beat it?

The following are the earliest takes of each species named during 1885.
March 27th, Pileated Woodpecker, Cardinal Grosbeak; April 2nd,
Turkey-Buzzard, Black Vulture, Tufted Titmouse; April 7th, Carolina
Chickadee, Kildeer; April 10th, Swallow-tailed Kite; April 11th, Texan
Screech Owl, Carolina Dove; April 15th, Red-bellied Woodpecker; April
17th, Yellow-throated Vireo; April 20th, Common Crow, Wild Turkey; April
27th, Mockingbird; April 28th, Carolina Wren; May 4th, Yellow-billed
Cuckoo, Dwarf Cowbird; May 8th, Lark Finch, Scissor-tailed Flycatcher,
Texas Orchard Oriole, Yellow-winged Sparrow; May 9th, Black-throated
Bunting, Painted Bunting, Summer Red-bird; May 11th, Texan Quail, Blue
Grosbeak; May 18th, Meadow Lark; May 22nd, Blue-gray Gnatcatcher; June
3d, Bronzed Grackle; June 8th, Boat-tailed Grackle; June 19th, Kingbird,
the second set that I have taken in Texas during six years’ collecting.

                                                          J. A. Singley,

Giddings, Texas.




                     The Scissor-tailed Flycatcher.


                  (milvulus forficatus (Gm.) swains.)

This beautiful bird is one of the commonest summer residents of North
Texas. They usually arrive from the south about the 15th of April in
small flocks or pairs, and always make themselves known by their loud
and noise-some voices. This bird has a very peculiar way when flying, of
stopping—as it appears—in the air, and then making a straight shoot
upward to the height of fifteen or twenty feet, and instantly darting
downward to about a level with where it started. This is always repeated
two or three times before taking their onward flight. While making this
tumble as it were, it always gives loud, quick screams, and is very
conspicuous by the display it makes in opening and closing the tail like
scissor blades. It is a very active, dashing and noisy bird; also very
showy and graceful. The general color is a hoary-ash, almost white
below, with a scarlet crown patch, and a bright scarlet on the sides at
insertion of wings. The wings have a blackish cast with whitish
underparts, and various parts of the body are tinged with a rich salmon.
Most of the tail feathers are black or dusky, while some of the longer
ones are mostly white or rosy; these feathers are long and narrow,
sometimes reaching a foot in length. The above description is that of a
male now lying before me. The female averages smaller, and the tail is
much shorter, while the color of the plumage is duller than that of the
male.

They begin to nest about the 10th of May, and fresh eggs may be found as
late as June 25th. The nest and eggs resemble those of the kingbird very
much, and it is almost impossible to distinguish them from each other,
unless they are well identified; but, as a general thing, the
scissor-tails’ eggs have larger and more conspicuous blotches than those
of the kingbird. During the summer of ’85 I found nests of the kingbird
and scissor tail in the same tree, and the nests and eggs were
identically the same; so to make sure of the identity, I had to wait
until both birds had occupied their own nest.

Their favorite nesting places are in the scrubby postoak and mesquite
bushes growing on our broad prairies. The nests are usually placed in
forks at from six to thirty feet from the ground, and constructed of
various materials, such as weed-tops, wool, cotton, rootlets, paper,
rags, etc., and lined with fibrous roots, wool, cotton, etc.

The number of eggs laid are usually four or five in number, of a
rounded-oval shape, the color being white, boldly blotched or marked
with reddish-brown, and obscure lavender shell markings, chiefly at the
larger end. The size of the eggs averages about .67 by .85.

                                                            E. C. Davis.




                                 —THE—
                          Sunny South Oologist


  A MONTHLY DEVOTED TO THE INTERESTS OF ORNITHOLOGISTS AND OOLOGISTS.

                        Edited and Published by
                            EDWIN C. DAVIS,
                          GAINESVILLE, TEXAS.


We request all of our readers to send us descriptions of their
collecting trips, or any items of interest relating to birds, their
nests or eggs.

                      TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION

  Single subscription             50 cents per year.
  Foreign countries               65 ” ” ”
  Single copies                   5 cents each.
               (No stamps taken for subscriptions.)

                    ADVERTISING RATES.

           Single insertions 10 cents per line.
                            1 mo.   2 mo.   3 mo.
          5 lines            $.40    $.65   $1.00
          1 inch              .75    1.35    2.00
          ½ column           2.00    3.50    4.50
          1 column           3.50    5.50    8.00
          1 page             6.00   10.00   13.00

Yearly advertisements payable quarterly in advance.

☞All advertisements must be in by the 23rd of each month, to insure
insertion in the next issue


                              REFERENCES:
                   THE GAINESVILLE NATIONAL BANK, and
                    FIRST NAT’L BANK, of Gainesville

Entered at the post-office at Gainesville as second-class matter




                        _EDITORIAL DEPARTMENT._


With this month’s issue I make my first bow to the Ornithologists and
Oologists of America. I refrained from so doing in the first issue as I
did not know at the time how my little journal would be received. But,
as I have had so many encouraging words from my friends in every part of
North America, I will now promise henceforth to give you the most
reliable and best reading matter obtainable, and shall try my utmost to
make this magazine a great help in the advancement of that most
delightful branch of natural history—Ornithology and Oology. Trusting
that my friends will be as well pleased with this and the following
numbers, as with the first, I remain,

                         Yours very sincerely,

                                                         Edwin C. Davis.


Easter comes this month, so don’t fail to look for the “rabbit” nests.


Don’t fail to read the great offers to “club-getters” on the inside page
of first cover leaf.


Our “Exchange and Want” column is worth the price of a year’s
subscription alone to subscribers, in helping them make exchanges.


We will stick to our first promise; that is, we will enlarge our paper
as soon as we are convinced it will pay us. So do not delay, but
subscribe at once. The price is only 50 cents per year.


What do you think of the appearance of “our” little journal this month?
Don’t you think you have been fully repaid already for the small amount
invested—fifty cents—for a year’s subscription?


Collectors look for the nests of the crow, chickadee, nuthatch and hawk
this month. You will find the chickadee’s and nuthatche’s the latter
part of the month, while the hawks and crows breed earlier.


Two Canvas-back ducks were killed near Gainesville, Tex. on the 22nd of
February. They were very handsome specimens, and a rare avis in this
section. They were the first I think ever seen in this county.


The article written by Mr. Harry G. Parker, entitled “Pennsylvania
Birds,” is one of great value to Oologists (old and young) in
Pennsylvania and adjacent states, as it gives the correct nesting
seasons of birds found in that locality, and also tells the nature of
country in which their nests are found. This article was compiled for
the editor as a special favor, by Mr. Parker in October last.


We are more than pleased with the number of subscribers received since
our last issue, and in return for your promptness shall promise to give
a year’s subscriptions worth of valuable information in each succeeding
issue.


What has become of the “Standard Directory” to be published by A. E.
Southworth & Co., of Woodstock. Ill’s., and to appear January 10th,
1886? We have heard several complaints of its non-appearance. Echo
answers.


Go! Get thee to work!! You have only one more month to compete for
premiums offered (on the inside of front cover page) to club-getters. So
go to work at once, and perhaps you will be the one to carry off the
“pie.” Don’t wait one moment, but “make hay while the sun shines.”


We had a very pleasant call from Dr. F. L. Yoakum, of Tyler, Texas, one
of the leading scientists of the state. His stay was short, but
exceedingly interesting. When visiting our city again we shall be
pleased to have him call, as he will be doubly welcomed.


If all goes satisfactory this month, I will enlarge with the May number;
also enlarge the subscription price. So do not wait, but subscribe at
once, and you will save money.




                          EXCHANGES AND WANTS.


  Brief exchange or want notices, not exceeding thirty words, will be
  inserted free in this column to subscribers only. Notices over thirty
  words will be charged at the rate of one-half cent per word. To
  outsiders, 25 cents for each insertion; cash with order.


I wish to exchange the coming season with good collectors, especially on
the coast and in the south. My sets of eggs will be rare and
first-class. Exchange limited. No postals answered.

                                                          Fred M. Dille,

Greeley, Colorado.




                              Kind Words.


Yesterday’s mail brought me what I have been anxiously looking for—The
Sunny South Oologist. It is very neat, and I do hope you will get enough
subscribers to continue and enlarge.

                                                         Fred. M. Dille,

Greeley, Col.


Your magazine is at hand, and I just have time to say that I am
exceedingly well pleased with the articles in your periodical; they are
far above the average.

                                                           Oliver Davie,

Columbus, Ohio.


I have read its pages, and am pleased with your large circle of
Oological correspondents and your undoubted ability as an editor. It
should prove of sufficient value to the collectors of the country to
make it take its proper place in the literature of the subject; not only
because of your generous and gentlemanly treatment of me in the past at
all times, but because I believe The Sunny South Oologist to have a live
and intelligent Oologist at its head.

                                                        Harry G. Parker,

Chester, Pa.


“The Sunny South Oologist,” is the title of a scientific publication
issued by our young townsman, E. C. Davis; No. 1 of volume 1 of which is
on our table. It is a credit to the young gentleman, and to our city. We
wish the enterprise success.—Gainesville Daily Hesperian.


The first number of The Sunny South Oologist is at hand, and I am more
than pleased with it and its contents.

                                                           V. E. Piston,

Rockland, Me.




                            CORRESPONDENCE.


  Anyone desiring questions answered relating to Birds, their Nests and
  Eggs, will favor us by sending them in, and we will answer them
  through this column to the best of our ability.

On the 28th of March, 1885, I found a nest of the Red-shouldered Hawk,
containing two eggs, which I took. Returning seven days later, and
seeing the bird fly from the nest, I concluded to take another look at
it, and was very much surprised to find two more eggs, although the
shells were much lighter marked than those taken previously, which went
to prove they were deposited by the same bird.

                                                               J. H. B.,

Oswego, Kansas.


Last summer, while out collecting, I found a three-storied nest of the
Summer Yellow bird. Each story contained one egg of the Cow bird, and
two of the Warblers. I also found a double nest of the Bronzed Grackle
containing nine eggs; four in the lower part, and five in the upper. The
total number of eggs from both nests were eighteen. Don’t you think this
a pretty good haul from two nests?

                                                                W. A. W.

Quincy, Ill’s.


I like the appearance of your paper very much, and trust it will be a
financial success.

                                                             D. H. Eaton

Woburn, Mass.


It is said that alligators’ eggs are esteemed by the natives of the
regions where those reptiles abound. Mr. Joseph, in his “History of
Trinidad,” says that he found the eggs of the cayman very good. The
female alligator lays from 120 to 160 eggs. They are about as large as
the eggs of a turkey, and have a rough shell filled with a thick
albumen.


There is an eagles nest on the stump of an old tree in the middle of
Caddo lake, near Jefferson, Texas, and a pair of eagles have occupied
this as their home for more than twenty years.




                           Blue-fronted Jay.


                    (CYANOCITTA STELLERI FRONTALIS.)

  One would, with a general knowledge of the nesting habits of the Jays,
  look for their nests in trees and bushes; but with the recent
  observations on the habits of this bird, by N. S. Goss, in the Auk,
  April, 1885, we have additional light thrown upon the subject. He
  found quite a number of nests of the Blue-fronted Jay in the vicinity
  of Julian, California, in the spring of 1884, and “in all cases but
  one, in holes and trough-like cavities in trees and stubs, ranging
  from four to fifty feet from the ground, generally ten to twenty feet.
  The nest found outside was built upon a large horizontal limb of an
  oak close beside a gnarl, the sprout-like limbs of which thickly
  covered the nest overhead, and almost hid it from view below.” They
  were quite bulky, loosely made of sticks, stems of weeds, and lined
  with fibrous rootlets and grasses; and, as they were all built at or
  near the opening, the tell-tale sticks projected and made the finding
  of the nests not difficult. Mr. Goss gives the color of the eggs as
  light blue, speckled and spotted with dark brown, rather thickest at
  large end, and the measurements of two sets, as follows: One taken May
  19, 1.20 by .87, 1.20 by .88, 1.21 by .88; May 21, 1.22 by .88, 1.15
  by .86, 1.19 by .86, 1.16 by .85.

  Mr. W. O. Emerson informs me that he finds the nests in the vicinity
  of Haywards, Cal., placed in oaks, redwood and other tall trees.

The above interesting article is an extract from _Davies’ New Key to the
Nests and Eggs of North American Birds_, taken from specimen leaves sent
me, and of which is a fair sample of descriptions of the nests and eggs
of each bird contained in that book.—Editor.




                         Birds of Pennsylvania.


The following data is taken from notes made during a series of years,
all within this state, and all from personal observation.

(“C” means common, “R” means rare.)

1. Wood Thrush. (C). Breeds May 1st, to June 15th. Nests generally
placed in thick woods, near clearings.

2. Wilson’s Thrush. (R). Breeds June 2nd. Nests placed in thickets, with
southern exposure.

7. American Robin. (C). Breeds May 1st to July 25th. Nests made near
habitations, in trees, outhouses, anywhere almost.

11. Mocking Bird. (R). Only one known instance in Delaware county.

12. Catbird. (C). Breeds May 15th to July 1st. Nests placed in gardens
or clearings of woods, always near man.

13. Brown Thrasher. (C). Breeds May 15th to June 20th. Nests found in
blackberry tangle or thickets, high or lowland.

22. Bluebird. (C). Breeds May 1st to July 20th. Nests found anywhere, in
bird boxes, natural holes in trees, etc.

41. Black-capped Chickadee. (C). Breeds May 10th to 25th. Nests found in
timber cleared districts, in stumps about 6 feet high.

51. White-bellied Nuthatch. (R). Breeds April 15th to May 1st. Nests
found in excavated holes, remote from habitation.

60. Carolina Wren. (C). Breeds April 8th to May 10th, (two broods).
Nests found about rocks, remote from habitation.

63. House Wren. (C). Breeds May 15th to June 10th. Nests found in
Orchards, or about farm houses.

67. Long-billed Marsh Wren. (C). Breeds June 12th to 18th. Nest found in
low, fresh meadows.

93. Summer Yellowbird. (C). Breeds June 10th to 20th. Nests found near
running water, in low, flat country.

99. Chestnut-sided Warbler. (R). Breeds June 20th. Nests found in
pastures, or small woods.

115. Golden-crowned Thrush (C). Breeds June 10th to 25th. Nests found on
the ground, in deep woods.

123. Yellow-breasted Chat. (C). Breeds May 28th to June 10th. Nests
found in upland thickets, southern exposure.

128. American Redstart. (R). Breeds June 15th. Nests placed near
roadsides.

135. Red eyed Vireo. (C). Breeds June 10th to 20th. Nest found in woods
of young trees, not over ten feet from the ground.

139. Warbling Vireo. (C). Breeds June 10th to 20th. Nests placed in
trees, generally 25 feet from the ground, or more.

143. White-eyed Vireo. (R). Breeds June 10th to 20th. Nests placed in
blackberry thickets, near the ground.

151. Cedar Waxwing. (C). Breeds June 15th to 25th. Nests generally found
in orchards.

152. Purple Martin. (C). Breeds June 2nd. Nests placed in bird boxes.

153. Cliff Swallow. (C). Breeds June 1st to 5th. Nests placed in barns
and under eaves.

154. Barn Swallow. (C). Breeds June 1st to 15th. Nests placed in barns.

155. White-bellied Swallow. (R). Breeds June 1st to 15th. Nests placed
in bird boxes.

157. Bank Swallow. (C). Breeds May 22 to June 1st. Nest placed in sand
banks, etc., at the end of a burrow.

161. Scarlet Tanager. (C). Breeds June 10th. Nest found in deep woods.

E. S. English Sparrow. (C). Too well known to detail.

181. American Goldfinch. (C). Breeds from July 15th to Aug. 20th. Nests
found by a roadside, or in orchards.

197. Grass Finch. (C). Breeds June 10th. Nests placed in pastures or
meadow.

198. Yellow-winged Sparrow. (R). Breeds June 25th. Nests placed in
meadows or pasture.

211. Chipping Sparrow. (C). Breeds May 8th to June 30th. Nests near
houses or in parks.

214. Field Sparrow. (C). Breeds May 1st to June 10th. Nests placed on or
near the ground, in high country generally.

231. Song Sparrow. (C). Breeds May 1st to June 30th. (three broods).
Nests found anywhere.

233. Swamp Sparrow. (R). Breeds July 4th. Nests placed in swampy
meadows.

237. Chewink; Towhee. (C). Breeds June 1st to 15th. Nests placed on the
ground in open woodland.

242. Cardinal Grosbeak. (C). Breeds April 20th to May 30th. Nests found
in wooded tangle and briars.

244. Rose-breasted Grosbeak. (R). Breeds June 10th. Nests found in
borders of woods.

248. Indigo Bunting. (C). Breeds June 2nd. Nests placed in blackberry
tangle in open fields.

257. Bobolink. (R). Seldom found breeding in southern Pennsylvania.

258. Cowbird. (C). Breeds from April to August. Eggs placed in nests of
Pewees, Sparrows, Chats, Tanagers, etc.

261. Red and Black, Sh’d Blackbird. (C). Breeds May 20th to June 20th.
Nests placed on the ground, or in low bushes in swampy places.

263. Meadow Lark. (C). Breeds May 20th to June 30th. Nests placed in dry
pastures and fields.

270. Orchard Oriole. (C). Breeds June 5th to 20th. Nests placed in
orchards.

271. Baltimore Oriole. (C). Breeds June 5th to 20th. Nests found near
houses generally.

278. Purple Grackle. (C). Breeds April 25th. Nesting in colonies, in
cedar trees.

282. Common Crow. (C). Breeds April 15th to 30th. Nests placed in very
high trees in woods.

289. Blue Jay. (R). Breeds April 15th to 30th. Nests found in deep
woods.

304. Kingbird. (C). Breeds June 1st to 20th. Nests placed in sycamore
trees, or in orchards.

312. Gt. Crested Flycatcher. (C). Breeds June 1st to 20th. Nests found
in orchards, in natural cavities of trees.

315. Pewee; Phœbebird. (C). Breeds April 20th to June 10th. Nests placed
under bridges or eaves of small spring houses, etc.

320. Wood Pewee. (C). Breeds June 1st. Nests placed in woods or
orchards.

324. Acadian Flycatcher. (C). Breeds June 5th to 20th. Nests found near
running water or sloping ground.

335. Ruby-throated Hummingbird. (R). Breeds June 1st to 15th. Nests
found near a spring of water in orchard or woods.

351. Chimney Swift. (C). Breeds July 1st to 15th. Nests placed in
chimneys.

357. Night Hawk. (C). Breeds June 1st to 20th. Nests placed on bare
ground on an elevated plateau.

361. Downy Woodpecker. (R). Breeds in May. Nests placed in excavated
holes in woods.

575. Red-headed Woodpecker. (C). Breeds June 15th. Nests placed in
solitary trees in fields.

378. Yellow-shafted Flicker. (C). Breeds May 15th to June 15th. Nests
placed anywhere.

382. Belted Kingfisher. (C). Breeds May 10th to June 15th. Nests placed
in holes in banks along streams in low lands.

387. Yellow-billed Cuckoo. (C). Breeds June 5th to 12th. Nests placed in
densest thickets of bramble and grapevine.

388. Black-billed Cuckoo. (C). Breeds same as preceding species.

394. Am. Barn Owl. (R). Breeds April 1st to 15th. Nests placed in dead
trees, on low meadow lands.

402. Little Screech Owl. (C). Breeds April 1st to 15th. Nests placed in
beech trees, or apple trees.

420. Sparrow Hawk. (C). Breeds May 1st to June 1st. Nests placed in
holes of dead trees, anywhere.

425. Fish Hawk. Common in New Jersey, but rare in Pennsylvania.

431. Cooper’s Hawk. (C). Breeds April 10th to May 1st. Nests generally
placed in deep and solitary woods, in large trees.

432. Sharp-shinned Hawk. (R). Same as 431.

436. Red-tailed Hawk. (R), Same as 431.

439. Red-shouldered Hawk. (R). Same as 431.

443. Broad-winged Hawk. (R). Same as 431.

460. Mourning Dove. (C). Breeds May 1st to June 30th (2 broods). Nests
found remote from man, in silent places.

480. Bobwhite. (C). Breeds May 20th to June 30th. Nests on the ground in
field or pasture.

494. Green Heron. (C). Breeds May 10th to June 10th. Nests placed in
large trees, sometimes in orchards near swamps.

516. Killdeer. (C). Breeds June 1st to 15th. Eggs placed on ground (no
nest), on a slope near water.

557. Spotted Sandpiper. (C). Breeds June 1st to 15th. No nest. Eggs
placed on the ground, on a slope near water.

The Rails breed plentifully on New Jersey coast, but sparsely in
Pennsylvania.

613. Summer Duck. (R). Breeds May to June 15th. Nest placed in hollow
tree near water.

In filling out the above data, I have omitted several species which
occasionally breed here.

                                                        Harry G. Parker.

Chester, Delaware Co., Pa.




                     Nesting of the Long-eared Owl.


                           (ASIO AMERICANUS)

For the Sunny South Oologist:

It was on the bright spring morning of April 25, 1885, that a friend and
myself started for the big woods in search of hawks’, crows’, etc.,
eggs.

We first went to a crows’ nest we found building the Saturday before,
and were most fortunate in securing 3 fresh eggs. This was comparatively
a good find, owing to the scarcity of that bird in this locality.

We next made our way to a tammerac swamp, and on the edge we went a
little out of our way to look at an old crow’s nest that we knew of, for
mere curiosity sake. In the center of the nest two prongs poked out and
we thought they were two sticks sticking up; but, to be sure, my friend
kicked on the tree, and to my great joy the two prongs moved. At this my
friend began to climb the tree, and when about half way up, a large
yellowish-brown bird flew sluggishly off the nest, and I could see it
was an owl, but what kind I was uncertain. When he reached the nest and
shouted down there were 5 eggs in it, I was so excited that I went up
and helped him down with them, although there was no need of it. They
were of a clear white, and almost globular in form, and measured about
1.60 x 1.40 inches. We imagined them to be all kinds of owls, and were
very anxious to find out what they were.

We hunted around now until noon and then sat down by a spring and ate
our dinner, which we had brought with us. After a little “lounge” in the
sun after our meal, we started out again, and by 3 o’clock p. m., had
found nothing but last year’s nests. About 3:30 we came to another
tammerac swamp, and in the center there was an old marsh hawk’s nest I
was acquainted with, and we made for it, thinking there might be an
owl’s nest in it, and you may imagine my delight at seeing the same kind
of horns sticking up in the center. This nest was only about 7 feet from
the ground, and as soon as I kicked the tree the owl flew off and lit on
a limb close by, and I identified her as being a long-eared owl. I
regretted that I did not have my gun with me, or I would have had her
this day all mounted. I climbed the tree, and in the nest found four
more eggs just like those in the first nest, and now our minds were
lightened.

As it was getting time to be going home, we started, and on arriving,
blew our eggs and found them to be fresh; and one of the sets now glow
in the collection of the editor of this paper.

I have found several sets besides this, and know of others being found
around here, and they invariably occupy other birds’ nests.

                                                       Geo. G. Cantwell,

Minneapolis, Minn.




                    The Road-runner; Chaparral Cock.


                       (GEOCOCCYX CALIFORNIANUS).

For the Sunny South Oologist:

This species (which may be described as a rather long tail with a small
bird on the “for’ard” end of it) occurs rarely in this locality.
Ornithologists generally give the number of eggs in a set as “6 to 9.” I
had previously taken several sets, containing from two to four eggs; and
finding a nest with two eggs on May 8th, 1885, I concluded to give the
bird a chance to fill out the set. The nest was placed in the bushy top
of a small black-jack oak, about twelve feet from the ground. It was a
bulky structure 16 inches in diameter, 5 inches in depth, and nearly
flat on the top—not more than an inch deep, built of large sticks,
twigs, and weeds in the lining. I visited the nest on the 9th and 10th,
and although the bird was “tu hum” every time, the set had not increased
any in number. During the 11th, 12th and 13th, three more eggs were
added to the set, making five in all. I waited until the 19th, when, as
no more eggs were laid, I took the nest, shooting the female. On
dissection I found that within the next two or three days two more eggs
would have been added to the set. Incubation was about one-half advanced
in two of the eggs. The question is, can I call this a full set? The
female when flushed from the nest would fly to the ground, and all to be
seen of her afterwards was a streak. They are famous runners, and it
takes a fast “pony” to overtake them.

                                                          J. A. Singley,

Giddings, Texas.


The Chinese pheasants turned loose in Oregon some time since have
interbred with the native grouse, and a new game bird with the head of a
pheasant and wing and tail feathers of a grouse is the result.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.






