MARMOTTE ***


[Illustration]




  THE
  ADVENTURES
  OF
  A MARMOTTE.

  SOLD FOR
  THE DISTRESSED IRISH.


  LONDON:
  PUBLISHED BY SIMPKIN AND MARSHALL, STATIONERS’ HALL COURT;
  AND SPINK, LEEDS.

  MDCCCXXXI.

  PRICE ONE SHILLING.




PREFACE.


In presenting this little Work to the Public, I can solicit for it
no better protection than the generosity of an English heart; and I
must beg my little readers will make allowances for the faults it may
contain, in consideration of the cause in which it was written.

                                                          ELIZA GREY.

 _June, 1831._




THE

ADVENTURES

OF

A MARMOTTE.


My dear little friends, you have, I dare say, never before heard of a
Marmotte writing its history; I know it is great boldness on my part,
but I undertake it in the hope of amusing you, and perhaps procuring a
few shillings for the poor starving Irish, who so much need your kind
and generous compassion.

The first recollection I have of myself, was my lying curled up like a
little ball, with two or three brothers and sisters, in a nook in one
of the rugged Alps, near the pretty village of Courmayeur, situated in
the valley of Aosta, in Switzerland. This valley extends from the pass
of St. Martin, near the frontiers of Yoree, to St. Bernard; it is very
fertile, and abounds in pastures and all sorts of fruit.

One day, when about six weeks old, contrary to the express commands of
my parents, I quitted the little crevice where we lived, and wandered
to a short distance, to amuse myself by jumping from rock to rock;
when, Oh! fatal effect of disobedience! I was perceived by a little
boy, who, uttering a cry of delight, threw down the crystals he had
been gathering, and seized me by the hind legs, before I could succeed
in scrambling back to my hiding place. Conceive my horror--my despair,
at this unexpected and frightful event. To revenge my capture, I bit
the little boy’s fingers most severely, but he only held me still
tighter: this was the fruit of my disobedience, which I have since so
often regretted. I hope my little readers never do any thing they are
bid not; for, as I have felt, naughtiness is always punished sooner or
later.

But to continue my history, this little boy carried me down with him
into the valley. How astonished I was when the first emotion of fear
had a little subsided, to see all the strange objects which presented
themselves to my view in this new world; for so this valley then
appeared to me, who had never before seen a human being, and knew only
of them from the terrible accounts our father and mother sometimes
gave us, on their return from excursions in search of food. I had,
therefore, rather an unpleasant opinion of my new acquaintance; but
this soon wore off, for he treated me very kindly, and I discovered
that the horrible stories I had heard of men’s eating us alive, were
untrue, or at least greatly exaggerated; for I fear they do sometimes
kill us for food, but only in times of great distress, when they can
procure nothing else.

On arriving at the cottage of little José, (for that was his name) he
shewed me to his mother, with whom he lived, praising my beauty, and
exulting in the fortunate acquisition he had made.

My little friends, as you may not perhaps all have seen a Marmotte,
I will describe myself in a few words, begging you at the same time
to look at my picture on the first page, for it was taken by a very
celebrated artist, and was said at the time to be a striking likeness.

My head something resembles that of a hare, only the top of it is
larger and flatter, and my ears much smaller; so small, that they are
scarcely perceptible, though the hair on that part of my head is very
short. I have a large bushy pair of whiskers. My eyes, which are
bright and sparkling, are placed at the side of my head, like those of
a hare. The form of my body is between that of a bear and a rat, but
much smaller than the former, and a good deal larger than the latter.
My coat is generally of a sandy black, or red brown colour. My voice
sounds much like that of a little dog, when pleased, but our species
is remarkable for the shrill and piercing whistle which we employ when
irritated.

I think I have now given you a pretty accurate description of myself,
and I fear many of my little readers will feel inclined to say, that
little José was clever to find any beauty in me.

The old dame received me very kindly, but told her son he would not
be able to keep me long, as Marmottes were most mischievous little
animals. This I thought very ill-natured of her, and naughtily
determined to revenge myself, by gnawing whatever came in my way; but
she afterwards treated me so kindly, that I am happy to say I soon gave
up this wicked intention: had I continued in it, I am very sure that
nothing but mortifications and misfortunes would have happened to me,
and I should have well deserved them.

Little José, thinking I must be hungry, gave me a great piece of bread.
I had never before seen any of this sort of food, which, on tasting,
I found so good that I soon finished it all, to the evident delight
of my kind little Master; who having put some nice fresh grass in one
corner of the room, laid me upon it; and being greatly overcome by the
fatigues and anxieties of the day, I was soon fast asleep.

On awaking next morning, I discovered many strange and wonderful
things, which the fatigue and fright of the preceding evening had
hindered me from observing. Among others, a very large pot on the fire,
black and ugly, which they called a Marmite, though I can assure you it
was not at all like me, but they gave me the name of Pierrot, for, on
hearing them talk of Marmite, I once or twice answered, thinking they
meant me. I soon became very much attached to my little master, who
treated me with the greatest kindness, sharing with me his bread and
milk; in return for which, I amused him by my gambols and mischievous
pranks: he soon taught me to jump over a stick, to make a bow, to
dance, and several other little tricks. When he went up the mountains,
on which occasions I was left at home with the old dame, his mother,
I laid very quietly all day in one corner of the kitchen chimney; but
when evening approached, I climbed up a wall, which he always passed,
there to await his arrival, and when I saw him, uttering a cry of
delight, I used to jump on his shoulder, and, purring with pleasure,
ride home in this manner. I was allowed to wander about wherever I
chose, for being very content and happy in my new abode, I had no wish
to leave it, and did not, I fear, much desire to return to my parents,
whose dull and monotonous way of living I could never have borne, after
the gaiety and attentions I enjoyed in the valley; for, though I say
it myself, little José was the envy of all the village for having so
nice an animal as his little Pierrot; and many were the caresses and
endearing epithets I received from all the little villagers; but my
young master always declared he would never part with me, and he kept
his word most faithfully; for though two English travellers, wishing
to have me, offered him a large sum of money, (I believe a guinea) if
he would sell me; he resolutely refused, although the money would have
been very acceptable, for he and his mother were both very poor. This
scene, of which I was myself a witness, greatly increased my attachment
to him, and I passed three of the happiest months of my life under
this hospitable roof; but, alas! I was not allowed to go through life
without misfortunes any more than my neighbours, for one evening, on
little José’s returning with me after having been absent all day, the
old dame, to our great horror and dismay, said that her sister Marie
had called to beg José would give his Marmotte to her little son Simon,
who was very ill, as she thought it would amuse him.

My dear little friends, I cannot find words strong enough to express
my wretchedness--my despair at this agonizing event. I jumped into the
arms of my little Master on his turning a wistful look towards me, and
burying my face in his neck, I wept most bitterly, and, overcome by
my feelings, (for though a Marmotte, I can assure you my feelings are
quite as deep as your own) soon fell fast asleep on José’s laying me on
the ground in the chimney corner, saying, “Poor little thing! It looks
as if it knew what we were saying.” I was awoke early the next morning
by the old dame, who, having placed me in a nice wicker basket, covered
me over with a clean cloth, carried me away without my again seeing my
little Master, who, I doubt not, had refused to part with me. I can
assure you my thoughts on this short journey were far from enviable; to
be thus carried away from my dear little José and given to a stranger,
who knew nothing about me, and who might perhaps treat me very cruelly.

Simon Pacchard was a poor sickly boy, the youngest of a large family,
his mother’s pet, and consequently a spoiled child; he was delighted
to have me, and almost smothered me with his caresses, but I was not
at all reconciled to my change of master. The whole appearance of
Marie Pacchard’s cottage was very different from that which I had
just quitted; it wanted that air of neatness and cleanliness which is
so charming in a cottage, as well as in a palace. Time did not at all
reconcile me to it, and every day which I passed in my new habitation
only served to render it more disagreeable: the children teased me, and
often, after Simon had recovered sufficiently to accompany his mother
when she went to work in the fields, I was left all day shut up in a
dismally dark room, without any thing to eat.

My novelty no longer pleasing my master, he soon sought to amuse
himself by tormenting me, and treating me very cruelly. I am sure if
spoiled children knew how disagreeable they make themselves by behaving
naughtily, and how it makes them disliked, they would never give way to
their ill tempers, or peevish whims. Having one day found, by chance,
his mother’s scissors, he caught hold of me, before I was aware of his
intention, and cut off all my bushy whiskers, at the very great risk of
putting out my eyes; for not at all liking this treatment, I struggled
most violently, and, enraged at his cruelty, I turned suddenly round
and bit his finger severely; this putting him into a great passion, he
kicked and beat me until I fell exhausted and half dead on the floor.

It was several days before I recovered the effects of this inhuman
conduct, for I was very much bruised, and so stiff and sore, I could
not move; when, however, I was able to walk, I determined on quitting
my miserable abode, and trying to find my way back to my dear José, who
I was sure would be delighted to see me again. Accordingly, being an
excellent climber, one morning when all the family had gone out, and
left me as usual, shut up, I contrived to climb upon the window, which
had been left open by chance: a very few moments sufficed me to descend
the side of the wall, and when I once more found myself at liberty in
the middle of the street, I recovered my spirits, and though it was
very frightful to be all alone, I was still much happier than when in
the power of wicked Simon.

I much wondered that my dear little friend José had never been to see
me since we parted, but hoping for the best, I took the road I had
so often before traversed on his shoulder, and found myself, after
numerous frights and escapes, at the door of my old home. Think how
distressed I was, when on entering, I perceived my dear little friend
seated by the fire side, looking very pale, and so changed since I had
last seen him! Uttering a cry of agony, I jumped into his arms. He was
greatly surprised, and exclaimed, while he tenderly caressed me with
his emaciated hand, “My poor, poor Pierrot! you are as much changed as
I am. What can have happened?” added he on observing my bruises which
were not yet quite recovered, “The wicked little Simon! can he have
done this? Mother, mother,” cried he, as the old dame entered the room,
“look! here is poor Pierrot returned all beaten and bruised, I am sure
he has been very ill treated.”

I soon learned from the conversation of little José and his mother,
that his present illness had been caused by a fall from a rock, while
seeking for crystals; and that he had dislocated his ankle, which had
caused him much pain. I was treated with the greatest kindness by
my old friends, and the remedies which the old dame applied to my
aching sides, together with the abundant food which I now enjoyed,
soon restored my good looks; but alas! I was destined to suffer new
misfortunes; for Simon, furious at my having escaped his power, and
thinking I might have returned to my old master, came in search of me.
Unluckily, he arrived one morning when I was playing before the door
in the sun. It was now winter; the snow was thick upon the hills, and
the ponds and rivers were covered with ice; you will wonder that I
should have been playing out of doors instead of sleeping as is usual
with the Marmottes in winter; but when well fed and kept warm, this
sleepiness does not affect us. As I before said, I was outside the
door, and a short distance from the cottage, when Simon arrived, and
gently advancing towards me with a piece of cake in his hand, persuaded
me foolishly to go quite close to him. Oh! how silly I was to trust
myself so near this wicked boy who had before treated me so ill! But
I never imagined he could intend to hurt me, till I discovered myself
once more in his cruel hands; I then began to tremble, but it was
too late, for I was in his power, and there was no way of escaping. I
whistled as loud as I could, in the hope of attracting the attention
of little José, but he was still so lame that I might have been killed
before he could have arrived. Conceive then my horror on finding myself
carried away towards a great pond at a short distance from the cottage.
I gave myself up for lost, when I saw the malicious grin with which
Simon looked at me; and my fears were but too truly verified, for on
approaching the pond, he made a little hole in the ice, which was very
thick, and notwithstanding all my efforts to the contrary, pushed me
into it, and would, I doubt not, have kept me there till I should have
died of cold and suffocation, had it not been for the lucky arrival of
my friend José, who, attracted by my cries, had followed us as fast
as his ankle would allow him, and came just in time to save me from
instant death.

How is it possible that little boys and girls can reconcile themselves
to the idea of willingly inflicting pain on poor unoffending animals
committed to their care, and formed for their benefit; but alas! it is,
I fear, too often the case; children are sometimes so very naughty;
but hoping my little readers possess kind dispositions and feeling
hearts, which would shudder at the idea of giving pain to a poor dumb
animal, I will leave this disagreeable subject, and continue my own
melancholy story. On seeing José approach, Simon dragged me out of
the water, and throwing me half dead on the ground, ran away as fast
as possible, knowing, I suppose, that he had been very wicked, and
no doubt fearing to be punished for it by my little protector, who
was older and much stronger than him. I now lost all power of seeing
or hearing, and laid for several days in a deep sleep. José feared
very much I should die: he watched over me with the greatest anxiety
and kindness, for he was really very fond of me; and when at length
I recovered sufficiently to open my eyes, his joy knew no bounds; he
sung, whistled, clapped his hands, and jumped and danced with delight.
(for his ankle had quite recovered during my illness) He fetched me
some bread and milk, which by his entreaties I was at length induced to
eat; and it did me a great deal of good, for I was soon able to move
about; and being kept in the warm kitchen by the fire side, was quite
recovered before spring arrived, with its delightful warm sun, which
made me gayer and merrier than ever.

The cruel Simon was shunned by all the village; for no good little
child would play with him after he had behaved so wickedly to a poor
animal which could not defend itself.

One day, while at Aosta, a pretty town seated at the foot of the Alps,
on the river Dora, capital of the valley of the same name, whither I
had accompanied my Master on a visit to his friends, as I was sitting
outside the window, waiting the return of José, who had gone on a
message, my attention was attracted by an ugly sallow-looking boy, who
spoke so strange a language, I could not at all understand him: induced
by my curiosity, which is a most shocking propensity in little boys and
girls, as well as in animals, I went close to him, hoping to discover
what he was saying. He looked at me very earnestly, and I foolishly
imagined he admired my beauty. I think I hear you say, “How could so
ugly an animal as a Marmotte, think itself handsome?” but my dear
little friends you will, I fear, often meet with examples of this kind
of folly.

Not in the least fearing his approach, I allowed him to stroke my head
and smooth down my hair; when, Oh! dreadful misfortune! he seized me
in his great hands, and, before I well knew what had happened, I found
myself in a large bag, hanging from his back.

The unfeeling monster, regardless of my cries and efforts to escape,
whistled a gay tune, and continued his road down one street and up
another, till I was quite tired; at length we stopped at a house; (so
at least I supposed, for I could not see any thing out of the bag in
which I was inclosed,) but instead of going up stairs, we descended
flight after flight, until we arrived in a dark damp-looking room,
which I afterwards discovered to be a cellar. I was released from my
prison and placed on the floor, which was covered with hare and rabbit
skins, bird cages, boxes, and rubbish of every description. Oh! how
bitterly did I now regret that idle curiosity which had led me to
approach this stranger, who had perhaps separated me for ever from my
dear little José.

I felt sure I should die if left long in this horrible place, where the
cold and disagreeable smell of the hare and rabbit skins made me feel
quite ill: I crept into the corner the farthest from them, but here
again a new and still more dangerous object presented itself in the
form of a large dog lying fast asleep.

We Marmottes have as great an antipathy to dogs as cats have; judge
then of my horror on seeing this one, which I doubted not would attack
me as soon as I should be perceived. I gave myself up for lost, for it
was so much larger and stronger than I was, that I should have had no
chance had we come to blows; therefore, curling myself up into a ball,
I took refuge behind a great barrel, and now anxiously desired the
presence of the ugly sallow-faced boy, whose departure had given me so
much pleasure a few minutes before; but it was a long long time before
he returned: however the great dog did not awake, and I was delighted
when the boy took me in his arms and carried me out of this horrible
dungeon, which I hoped most earnestly never again to enter.

What pleasure did I feel in again enjoying the bright light of the
sun, hoping, if once able to effect my liberty, to discover José, who
I had not for an instant ceased to think of; but I forgot the streets
at Aosta were more numerous, and not so well known to me, as those of
Courmayeur: however I had no opportunity of trying my sagacity, for
on being taken up into the kitchen, I was given to a little boy who
was going to Paris to seek his fortune, as many little boys from this
country do.

My present owner told him to take me and sell me for the highest
price he could get. Though delighted to escape from the miserable
cellar where I had been confined, still I could not endure the idea of
quitting my own country, and perhaps never again seeing dear José; I
wept, screamed, whistled, and bit, but all to no purpose. The journey
to Paris was very long and uninteresting, to me at least, who could see
nothing, travelling in a covered basket; and as I am sure my little
readers are impatient to arrive at a large town, I will take them
immediately to Paris; that great and wonderful city, where there are
always so many amusing things to be seen.

I had every opportunity of enjoying all the novelties and curiosities
which the Champs Elysées, the Boulevards, and the streets present to
a stranger; for the little Swiss, who had brought me over, treated me
very kindly, and used to lead me all about with a little red collar
round my neck, from which was suspended a long chain that fastened
round his arm.

What amused me most of all the wonderful things which I saw, was an
exhibition called Punch. Those of my little friends who have never
seen it, will, I am sure, be highly delighted when they have the good
fortune to make the acquaintance of this amiable gentleman, who gives
his life and adventures in a most spirited manner, under the form of a
delightful little moveable theatre, of which he is the principal actor.

We arrived just in time to see the carnival; a fête at which people
of all ages amuse themselves by dressing in different ridiculous
costumes, as my little friends I dare say often do, and parading the
streets and public walks, some in carriages, some on horseback, and
some on foot.

While accompanying my Master to the Boulevards, where the best masks
(for so they call these ridiculous figures) are to be seen, I was--must
I own it, naughty enough to be highly amused by a misfortune which
happened to a poor little girl while crossing one of the gutters which
run through the middle of the streets in Paris; she was very smartly
dressed, in a pink muslin frock, yellow handkerchief, blue bonnet, and
bright scarlet shoes, which were so tight for her, she could hardly
walk, but went rolling from one side to another. When she arrived at
the gutter, unable to jump across from the pain which these tight shoes
made her suffer, her foot slipped, and she tumbled in. Poor little
girl; though I could not help laughing at this misfortune, still I
pitied her; for perhaps, after all, it was not her fault that she wore
such tight shoes and was so oddly dressed.

On the Boulevards we saw a number of very curious figures, some
dressed as harlequins, and others as columbines, &c. &c. But there
was one which greatly astonished and amused me; it was a beautiful
monkey, much larger than any I had ever before seen, mounted on a
little pony which it trotted up and down, looking as it passed into
all the carriages, through a large spy glass, at the same time making
the most hideous grimaces, and using its tail instead of a whip to
hurry its pony on. Judge of my surprise, when I heard an old woman near
me explaining to a little girl, who was rather alarmed by the near
approach of this animal, that it was not really a monkey, but a man
dressed up as one! I could hardly believe her, but I suppose it was
true.

My attention was soon attracted by a pretty looking girl, riding,
not as I had always seen people ride, but with her face towards the
horse’s tail. I was very much shocked, for I fancied it must be some
naughty child, placed there as a punishment; and soon after meeting
two or three more riding in the same manner, I thought they must be
school girls, who, having all committed the same offence, had therefore
received the same punishment; but I afterwards discovered they were
not girls, but a set of little boys dressed up in girls’ clothes, and
that they rode so for their own amusement.

I was very fond of walking up and down the Champs Elysées in an
evening, when it was crowded with gay company, there were always so
many things to see; and I was so delighted with the attentions paid me
by the dear children who used to be running about, with cheerful happy
faces and merry laughter.

We one day took a ride in a ship,--“A ride!” I think I hear you say,
“how could that be?” but such was the case, for we had neither sails
nor water to sail upon, but were in a kind of seat called, from its
shape, a vessel, which went round and round so fast that I became
quite giddy. As I was exhibiting my tricks to three or four smiling
children, an old English lord, attracted by my cleverness, asked the
little boy if he would sell me; and I was much distressed to hear him
answer that he would willingly, if he could get enough for me. “And
what do you call enough?” said the Englishman, “if I were to give
you a napoleon, (a piece of French money, which is not worth quite
seventeen shillings) would you be satisfied?” “Oh dear yes, and it is
much more than I ever expected to get for this poor little animal,”
presenting me to the old Lord, who told the boy to take me to number
-- Rue St. Honore. He accordingly carried me there in great glee, but
was, I think, like myself, rather sorry when he wished me good bye.
I was very much astonished at the magnificence of the house where I
now was; but what surprised me most was, on entering the drawing-room
after the old gentleman’s return, to see what I supposed to be three
or four other Marmottes; when _I_ moved they moved, when _I_ stood
still they did so also: delighted to find some animals like myself, I
ran scampering up to one of them, when, instead of finding a little
Marmotte, I hit my head against something very hard, reeled, and fell
back: on getting up, however, I still saw the same objects, and was
again advancing towards one of them, when the old Lord taking me in his
arms, carried me to what I have since discovered to be a large mirror,
when I perceived, that what I had taken for another Marmotte, was
only the reflection of myself. But I had no time to think how very odd
this was, (though I wished very much to have sent a looking-glass to
my father and mother, as I am quite sure they never saw one) for the
old gentleman’s little grandson came running in, and seizing me in his
arms, scampered away to shew me to his sister; and I really thought
they would have pulled me in pieces, for both insisted upon having me
to play with: however this sport was put an end to by the arrival of a
funny-looking old gentleman, with a white head, who I soon found was a
dancing-master; and my little readers cannot think how delighted I was
when these young people began to dance, to the sound of a beautiful
instrument called a kit, (not a kitten) which made the most charming
noise I ever heard. The little girl began by making a low curtsy, and
the little boy a bow; then off they set, and seemed to me to be trying
which could jump highest. I forgot my miseries; and José having taught
me to jump also, I ran into the middle of the room and capered and
frisked about in the highest glee; the children clapping their hands
and screaming with delight, whilst the old gentleman could hardly go on
with the tune for laughing; till at last he could resist it no longer,
and began to jump as high as any of us. We were all frisking about when
the door opened, and the old Lord entered: he laughed heartily at the
fun, and at last consented to be of the party, to please his darling
grandchildren. At first he was, I confess, rather stiff; but this soon
wore off, and he capered better than any of us, making a charming
noise with his fingers; but at last when he was taking an immense
jump into the air, his large wig fell off, and I being just where it
came, received it on my back! I really thought the little party would
have died with laughing at seeing me scampering round the room with
this large white wig on, like a cloak, shaking a cloud of dust from
it (called powder) at every jump I took: though I was nearly blinded
by it, and I confess terribly frightened at first, yet when I found
it would not hurt me, I did not so much mind. However standing still
at last, the children took me up in their arms, saying I was the most
delightful animal they had ever seen; far more amusing than Jacko,
the monkey. Their grandpapa procured another wig, and then they all
went to dinner, when I was greatly charmed at the beautiful dress of
the two servants, who had on coats of red cloth, with a great quantity
of gold lace upon them. I thought this Lord must be a very rich man
to put his gold upon his servants’ coats, instead of putting it into
his pocket; and if I could have spoken, I should have asked him to
give me a little to send to José and his mother. As a reward for my
dancing, the children said I should have a large apple all to myself;
and you cannot think my dear little friends howl liked it,--but, Oh!
I thought I should have died with fright when the door opened and in
came a large dog with Jacko, the monkey, riding on his back. The moment
he saw me he jumped on the ground, chattering in the most frightful
manner, and grinning so as to shew all his teeth. He came fiercely up
to where I was eating my apple, and before I knew what he was going
to do, snatched it from me: the footman seeing this, came to take it
away, but Mr. Jacko, knowing he had done wrong, was too clever for
him, and throwing the apple at the man’s head, hopped upon the table,
and in a violent rage (seeing the grandpapa going to take hold of him)
took up an orange in each paw, and threw them at the old gentleman. A
violent uproar ensued, every body trying to catch the enraged monkey,
who screamed and chattered in the most violent manner: cakes, oranges,
apples, raisins, plums, figs, in short every fruit upon the table, was
flying in the air, as the mischievous animal seized them in his paws,
and threw them about in all directions. He had just got a plate in one
paw, and a bottle of wine in the other, which he intended to send at
the head of the old Lord, when fortunately one of the footmen, seeing
the case was desperate, took a cushion from the sofa, with which he
succeeded in knocking Mr. Jacko down. The man was desired to take him
away and give him a good whipping, but it did him no good; for a day or
two afterwards we were left in the drawing-room alone, and Mr. Jacko
no sooner heard the door shut than he jumped up from his basket, where
it was supposed he was fast asleep, and looked round the room to
see what mischief he could be at. He first leaped upon a table where
there were some beautiful prints, and unfortunately there was also an
inkstand: well, Jacko peeped into this, and thinking, I suppose, what
it contained would be good to drink, took hold of it in his paw and put
it to his mouth, but spit it all out again a great deal faster than he
had swallowed it. In a violent passion he threw the inkstand down upon
the table, and the ink poured all over the beautiful prints. He then
saw a large china vase full of lovely flowers, and instantly went to
take one out, to smell I suppose, but it not coming as easily as he
wished, he gave a violent pull, and down went the beautiful vase, which
was broke in a thousand pieces. Seeing all this mischief, I thought I
would try and make somebody hear, so I whistled as loud as I could,
for which I was rewarded by his throwing a book at me with such force
that it knocked me down; after this, the ticking of a clock caught his
attention, and hopping on to the table where it stood, he tapped at
the glass which covered it, very gently at first, but at last in such
a rage that it broke! But this time he was punished, for the broken
glass cut his foot, and, screaming with pain, he ran about the room
spoiling every thing he touched with his bleeding paw: at last he saw
the little girl’s basket lying on a chair, and going up to it, thinking
I suppose there was something inside which he wished to eat, gently
put his paw in: at first he did not venture to poke it low enough to
get whatever it was that he wanted, but being too impatient to give up
the attempt, he stuffed his head in so fast, that he remained with the
basket sticking on it like a hat, so far over his eyes that he could
not see. I never saw such a rage as he was in; he ran about the room
thumping against all the chairs and tables, and must have hurt himself
very much: however a servant coming in caught hold of Mr. Jacko, and
carried him away to chain him up. The old Lord was so angry when he saw
the mischief he had done, that he gave him away directly. I liked my
little Masters exceedingly; for though they did pull me about, yet they
never hurt me.

Soon after these events we all left Paris for England; in a great
machine on four wheels, called “The Family Coach.” I travelled inside
on little Lucy’s knee, and slept nearly all the way. How astonished
I was on opening my eyes, after a long nap, to see at Boulogne an
enormous quantity of water all collected together, so much, that I
could not perceive any land, but beautiful blue waves for miles and
miles. Whilst changing horses, we walked down to the sands, and saw
some little boats come in, full of different sorts of fish, which their
owners had caught in the sea, for that is what they call the great body
of water which so much astonished me. I thought it very cruel to kill
all those pretty fish, which must have feelings like myself; but they
told me that almost all the poor people there lived upon them.

We arrived at Calais late in the evening, and set off next morning by
break of day in a large vessel called a “Steam Boat:” not feeling any
ill effects from its motion, I was greatly amused by watching all the
strange people on board. There was one, a Miss Wilnemina Pugabunder,
who seemed to cause infinite entertainment to all the passengers, by
the ridiculous affection she shewed for her numerous pets. A little
French Poodle, with a silver collar, ornamented with small bells, and
a long blue riband; a large Angola Cat, with a gilt collar, on which
were engraved its own name of “Silver Tabby,” and that of its mistress;
a large Macaw, two or three guinea-pigs, shut up in a basket, and a
quantity of gold and silver fish, in a large tub of fresh water. Though
so ill that she was almost unable to stand, still she would not leave
her favourites, but staid coaxing first one and then the other, and
doing her best to keep peace between them; for the dog did not like
the parrot, and the cat seemed to have rather too great an affection
for the fish; and when they unluckily came in contact with each other,
there was such a screaming from the animals themselves, as well as
their mistress, that you would have thought there was a whole menagerie
on board. Another of the passengers, an old lady, was so fat, and such
an enormous size, that it seemed quite a trouble to her to move about;
but her husband was quite the contrary, which rendered her the more
remarkable. I at first took him for her son, and it was not till I
heard her call him husband, that I could believe it, for he was not, I
am sure, so tall as my little Master, Cæsar. I afterwards learned they
called him a dwarf, and that he was going to England to show himself
as a curiosity, as well as his wife, whose extraordinary rotundity
rendered her a still greater object of astonishment.

We did not go to London on our road to Cherry Tree Park, the seat of
the Old Lord; at which I was very sorry, but comforted myself with
the hope of visiting it at some future time. All I saw in this new
country surprised me greatly; every thing was so different from what
I had before seen. I longed for poor José to share in the kindness
and attentions I received from this good family. The Young Lord
(as my little Master Cæsar was called, to distinguish him from his
grandfather) was a good tempered, high spirited lad, and though he did
sometimes tease me by making me run more than I liked, still I was
very fond of him, for I knew he did not do it with a wish to torment
me. His little sister Lucy was very amiable; all the poor about her
Grandfather’s estate seemed quite to adore her, she was so good to
them, and spent all her money in buying them clothes, which she made
herself. I advise all my little friends who have it in their power, to
be charitable; for, from the pleasure this little girl seemed to enjoy
when making others happy, it must be a very delightful thing.

Never having lived a country life, except in my native village, I
was greatly surprised at all the wonderful things I saw at the farm:
the nice clean kitchen, with its sanded floor, bright oven, great
arm chair, and large wooden clock, delighted me excessively; but I
was still more pleased when I saw how kind and attentive they are to
animals in England: the fold, with its fat beasts; the piggery, with
its great engine, to dress the dinners of its sleepy inhabitants;
the hen houses, with their flews, to keep them warm in winter; the
cow-house, so clean and neat, were all new to me: but I must not
omit the dairy, where I was a constant visiter when I could escape
unobserved, and steal from its bright earthen vases the good new milk,
or fine rich cream. When, however I was discovered to have committed
this offence, I was always severely punished, and told it was very
wicked to steal, even a thing of hardly any value; for if you can see
no harm in taking a cake or a bit of sugar which does not belong to
you, you will soon think there can be no harm in taking a sixpence or
shilling from Papa or Mamma, if you want it.

I here saw what I had been before told of,--shearing sheep. Little
Cæsar took me down with him one morning to the small stream which runs
close to the farm, where they were washing the whole flock, previous
to depriving them of their nice wool. I was almost stunned with the
noise of the men and boys, the barking of the dogs, and the bleating
of the poor animals themselves, who did not seem at all to like this
cold bath, and gained the opposite bank as fast as possible. A few days
after, while their wool was yet of a snowy white, the shepherd drove
them from the nice green hill where they were feeding to the farm,
where, fastened in the sheep pen, each waited its turn to be committed
to the hands of the shearer.

Little Lucy and her brother were very fond of riding: they had two
beautiful ponies which their Grandpapa had given them. Cæsar’s was a
very great favourite; it was so small, that one day having gone out to
meet the hounds, which were running in the fields near the house, its
long bushy tail, which nearly touched the ground, was by them taken for
the fox’s brush, and they all ran after him for some distance. Cæsar
was greatly amused at this little adventure, and came home in high glee
to relate to his sister the ludicrous mistake of the hounds in taking
poor Taffey for a fox. This pony was very fond of apples, and when his
little master did not take him one, would snuff about and put his nose
into his pocket, to see if he had forgot to bring him one, or was only
withholding it for his own amusement. When Taffey was turned out in
an evening, the children used to go and play with him in the field;
he knew their voices so well that he came trotting up as soon as ever
they called him; sometimes they gave him a pocket handkerchief, which
he would take in his mouth, gallop all round the field with, and bring
back, without having in the least injured it.

The harvest-home was a scene of great mirth and gaiety: my little
friends were permitted to join the merry group, who, after the happy
termination of their labours, had a feast and dance in the verdant
meadow their hands had helped to mow. The Old Lord seemed greatly
pleased with the amusement of his labourers and workmen.

On Little Cæsar’s birthday, which was the 17th of June, he was allowed
to invite a large party of his young friends to come and spend the
day with him and his sister. They had a great deal of fun; donkey
races for little books and toys, foot races, and games of every sort,
from puss in the corner to hunt the slipper: the evening ended with a
sillabub under a spreading beech tree; and great was the anxiety to
find to whose share the ring and sixpence would fall. Little Lucy drew
the ring, and Alfred Talbot, a friend of Cæsar, got the sixpence, upon
which there was a great noise, and all the children laughed excessively
at the little boy; why, I could not imagine.

I was very unhappy to hear the Old Lord say, one day to his
grandchildren, “My dears you are now old enough for me to think of
sending you to school. Your poor father had such an affection for
public education, that I agreed to his dying request of your receiving
one, when of proper age.” The little children both looked very grave
at this address, and the tears starting into poor Lucy’s eyes, she had
some trouble to hide her grief from her affectionate protector, who
could never bear to see her afflicted.

But I am sure she could not have been more grieved than I was; the
idea that I should probably be separated from my dear little friends,
and perhaps fall into the hands of some wicked boy, careless little
girl, or cross old gentleman, who, if I only discovered he wore a
wig, would, unlike my good Old Lord, be furious instead of amused; or
some old grumpy woman, who would prefer her tabbies, her minettes,
her pugs and her poodles to me, and would scold me most severely for
every slight misdemeanour. This idea made me very melancholy; and
the evening after I had heard this distressing intelligence I could
eat no supper, and retired for the night with a wretched head-ache,
feeling very ill. I was awoke next morning by Cæsar and Lucy who were
talking very earnestly. “But,” said the little boy, “I do not see why
I should be so sorry to go to school: it must be very nice to have so
many companions of my own age.” “Yes,” replied his sister, “but you
will be so far from home! so far from dear Grandpapa!”--“But I shall
always come home for the holidays, and I shall have such long accounts
to give you, dear Lucy, of all I have seen and heard--Oh! it will be
very nice! and our holiday will, I hope, be at the same time.” “How can
you think you will like going to school,” asked Lucy, “where you will
have to get up so early, to work so hard, and to eat a great piece of
thick batter pudding before you begin your dinner, that you may not
devour too much meat?” “That is the account Willy Dawson gives of his
school,” replied Cæsar; “but if you ask Tommy Longshanks, he is always
sorry when it is holiday time; for at Mr. Thumpem’s they are so happy
and merry, playing at cricket, football, leap frog, battledoor and
shuttlecock, fishing, and shooting with a bow and arrow, as soon as
lessons are over,--Oh! I think it will be quite delightful!” “I wish I
could expect as much amusement at the school I am going to,” observed
Lucy; “but I fear the girls, like those at Mrs. Adagio’s, will be very
sentimental, and pass their time on a verdant lawn, at the edge of a
running brook, or under the branches of a weeping willow, scribbling
poetry, or at least attempting to do so.” “Well we shall see,” said
Cæsar; “but come to Mrs. Marmalade’s, she promised to make each of us
a large plum cake whenever we went to school, so we must remind her
of it.” So saying they left the room, and I saw no more of them until
breakfast time, when Little Lucy, bringing me some bread and milk, said
very sorrowfully, “My poor dear Little Marmotte, what will become of
you when we are gone.” Oh! how I longed to speak her language, to have
asked her more about her departure! In the middle of the day, while I
was sitting in the drawing-room with the Old Lord, who on account of
the heat had taken off his wig and thrown it down, the entrance bell
rung, and, in a minute, before he could find his wig or make his escape
from the room, a servant announced Mrs. Eliza Grey.

“My dear Mrs. Grey, I am greatly shocked that I have lost my wig!”
exclaimed the old gentleman, as he advanced towards his visiter.

“Lost it! Has my naughty Little Lucy been playing you some new
trick,--teasing Grandpapa as usual?” “No, indeed I have not,” said my
young mistress, who had overheard these words as she tripped gaily into
the room, “but dear grannie! how very funny you look with your bald
head!”

“I think your naughty little pet must have stolen my periwig, as you
always call it, for I can find it nowhere.” “What is this new pet of
yours, my dear Lucy?” inquired Mrs. Grey, “I think I have never seen
it.”

“Not seen my Marmotte!” exclaimed she, running across the room to the
corner, where, reclining on the very wig in question, I was enjoying
the ludicrous appearance of my old friend.

“Oh! you abominable little thief!” cried Lucy, as soon as she perceived
me. “What have you done? I pity you the scolding you will get,” added
she, laughingly restoring the wig to her Grandfather, and placing
me on Mrs. Grey’s knee. “And what are you going to do with this poor
little animal, when you go to school?” said this good old Lady.

“I do not know, and I am very unhappy about it; but come Marmi, show
some of your tricks to this good Lady.” Upon which, I jumped down,
and began to dance and caper about to her great amusement; she seemed
highly delighted to see me eat like a squirrel--sitting on my hind feet
and feeding myself with my front paws.

To Lucy’s infinite delight, and my no small pleasure, Mrs. Grey
proposed taking me home with her; she had such a kind benevolent
countenance, and such good natured affectionate manners, that I was
sure she must be very amiable, and therefore liked the idea of living
with her, better than the chance of falling into the hands of some one
who might not treat me so well. It was not, however, without a deep
feeling of regret, that I took leave of the Old Lord and his charming
grandchildren, and quitted Cherry Tree Park; for though I was sure Mrs.
Grey would treat me very kindly, yet not being acquainted with her
household, I feared there might be people under her hospitable roof,
who might not treat me so well; and so it proved, for Miss Stitcher,
the lady’s maid, looked at me as an intruder, and was very cross from
the first day of my arrival; and the dreadful quarrels there sometimes
were between her favourite lap dog and myself, only served to increase
her ill will towards me; but Mrs. Grey continued very kind, and I heard
her one day saying, “It is very wrong of you, Martha, to treat that
poor little animal so ill; I always see you pinching and kicking it,
whenever it comes near you.” Miss Stitcher did not answer, but turned
away looking very ill-natured.

A short time after this, we went to London to pass a few days. I
expected great amusement from all the pretty things there, and hoped
perhaps to see my dear little Lucy, whose school was in that vast city.
But, as it happened, I was never more to see her; for the morning
after our arrival, I was sitting at the open window of the first floor
apartment, when a boy with a barrel organ stopped before the house
where we were, and played the national air of my country, which poor
José used so often to whistle: I listened, I gazed at the boy, I
listened again, and then having assured myself, by a long and ardent
look, of the identity of this little musician, with my oldest and
best friend José, I sprang from the window and leaped into his arms.
He had also, I think, recognized me; for I had a white mark under my
chin, which is not usual in animals of my species. He caressed me, and
called me his dear Pierrot; and seeing I answered to this name, he was
confident I was his own little Marmotte; and on Mrs. Grey’s coming to
the window to see what had become of me, he related to her my former
history, and the manner in which he had lost me.

This good old lady, touched by the affection which he shewed for
me, and which I seemed to return with such pleasure and gratitude,
consented to give me up to my former possessor; and the guinea which
she kindly added to the little sum he had collected during his absence
from his native country, enabled him to return to his own village, and
poor old mother, accompanied by me, whose joy at once more visiting
the rugged Alps and fertile valley d’Aosta, in company with my dear
José, knew no bounds; but I was very sorry on arriving at his cottage
to perceive how much his mother was changed during my absence. Poor
old woman; she now hobbles about with a great stick to support her
tottering steps, and age will, I fear, soon deprive her of her sight,
which is already become very dim.

The meeting between the mother and son was quite affecting. José was
now looked upon as the village oracle, having seen so much more of the
world than even its oldest inhabitants. His opinion was consulted,
and his advice was taken upon every occasion. I was also treated with
greater respect for being a traveller; and I can assure you I did
look very grave and learned, when seated on the bench by the side of
José: I listened to the long accounts he gave of all he had seen and
heard; and it was the amusement which these relations seemed to give
his companions that first gave me the idea of placing my adventures on
paper for the amusement of my young friends, the Young Lord and his
sister Lucy.

If any of my little readers desire to know the fate of the wicked
Simon, who bore so conspicuous a part in the commencement of this
story, I will inform them, that notwithstanding the beatings and
lectures he received from his father, as well as the fear and dislike
shewed him by all the villagers, he continued his inhuman conduct, and
at last fell a victim to it. May his fate prove a warning to all those
who are disposed to behave cruelly and wickedly towards poor feeble
animals, who have not force or strength to defend themselves. Let them
remember that holy precept “do unto others as thou wouldest that they
should do unto thee;” and ask themselves whether they would like to be
as ill used as the miserable victims of their power.

One day, a few months after I had quitted the valley, Simon went out
accompanied by two large dogs, to amuse himself with chasing some
cattle which were grazing in the valley. These animals, rendered
furious by this violent exercise, and the wounds inflicted by the teeth
of the dogs which Simon barbarously urged on to attack them, turned
fiercely upon their savage enemy, and knocking him down, soon left
him a bloody and mangled corpse; a frightful example of what the free
indulgence of the passions generally leads to.

I am writing in the chimney corner of José’s kitchen, which I hope
never again to quit for any length of time. I am as happy here as I
can be: my only complaint is that the day is never half long enough;
and I do not think I should ever have found time to write this little
book, had I not heard of the dreadful misery existing in Ireland, and
determined, if possible, to add my mite to the generous contributions
of the benevolent. My success now remains with you, my dear friends;
and pray remember, while you read these few pages, that it is a
Marmotte who writes, in the hope of providing a morsel of food for your
poor starving fellow-creatures.

I must now forward this little work to Mrs. Eliza Grey, who has kindly
offered to translate it; and only hope it may not arrive too late to
aid in buying some potatoes.


HENRY SPINK, PRINTER, LEEDS.




  JUST PUBLISHED,

  _AND SOLD FOR THE SAME CHARITABLE PURPOSE_.


  1.

  THE HISTORY OF A GERANIUM.

  PRICE ONE SHILLING, WITH FRONTISPIECE.


  2.

  THE MEMOIRS

  OF

  DICKEY, A YELLOW CANARY.

  BY MRS. MARY GREY.

  PRICE ONE SHILLING, WITH FRONTISPIECE.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.
