PRAYER-BOOK AND ARTICLES OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND***


Transcribed from the 1863 Rivingtons edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                PROPOSED SURRENDER OF THE PRAYER-BOOK AND
                    ARTICLES OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.


                                 A LETTER
                                  TO THE
                          LORD BISHOP OF LONDON,
                                    ON
                        PROFESSOR STANLEY’S VIEWS
                                    OF
                 CLERICAL AND UNIVERSITY “SUBSCRIPTION.”

                                * * * * *

                                    BY
                          WILLIAM J. IRONS, D.D.
     PREBENDARY OF ST.  PAUL’S, AND INCUMBENT OF BROMPTON, MIDDLESEX.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                      THEODORE WRIGHT, 188, STRAND;
    RIVINGTONS, WATERLOO PLACE; AND PARKERS, 377, STRAND, AND OXFORD.
                                  1863.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
              SAVILL AND EDWARDS, PRINTERS, CHANDOS STREET,
                              COVENT GARDEN.

                                * * * * *




A LETTER,
ETC.


                                            BROMPTON, _Whitsuntide_, 1863.

MY DEAR LORD,

IF twenty years ago, soon after a few of the clergy had asserted their
“claim to hold all Roman doctrine,” {3} a proposal had been made to
abolish Subscription to the English Formularies, it would surely have
been thought to indicate very grave disloyalty to our Church.  And now,
when others have asserted the right to unfettered “free-thinking” within
her pale, and endeavoured to vindicate that right in our Courts of Law,
can we help being struck at the intrepidity of the demand to sweep away
at once the sober restraints of orthodoxy to which Churchmen have been so
long accustomed?

Your Lordship has been openly addressed, as we are all aware, in behalf
of this “Relaxation of Subscription;” but as our Bishop—so deeply
interested in the welfare of the whole Church—I venture to believe that
you will do justice to opposite views, and in offering them to your
attention, I rely on that broad-minded charity to various schools among
us, which has marked your Lordship’s administration of this diocese.



Dr. Stanley’s position. {4a}


The eloquent advocacy of Dr. STANLEY on the other side is, indeed, no
slight advantage to the cause of those who would now supersede the
Prayer-book by “modern thought.”  In urging the surrender of all
Subscription to our Formularies, he can speak, in his position, with a
_prestige_ and power to which I can have no claim.  His testimony as to
the tone of mind now prevailing in Oxford, or among the younger clergy of
the last few years, it is not for me to impeach,—I must leave that to the
Bishop of Oxford; {4b} but certain of his deductions from very limited
facts, I may be permitted, I think, to call in question at once.  As one
who, without belonging to any party, has had the happiness of much
friendship with all—as a Churchman, I may add, who has kept steadily to
the old Prayer-book from very early childhood till now—I have had large
opportunities for many years of knowing the heart and mind of my brethren
the clergy, ten thousand of whom not long since responded to an appeal
which I and others had been invited to make to them; and I confess that I
am amazed at Dr. STANLEY’S supposition that Subscription is regarded as a
“grievance” (p. 23), a “perjury” (p. 24), an “absurdity” (p. 20), or an
“imposition” (p. 7) by any considerable number among us.  Allowing for
some irritable minds here and there, the generality have seemed to me to
have the deepest appreciation of the “quietness and confidence” which
have been, in the main, secured for our Church by the present laws, which
simply bind the clergy to say that they _believe_ the Prayers which they
use, and the Articles which they adopt as their “standard.”

Thus much I have felt compelled to say at the outset, because the
opposers of Subscription assume that their clients are so numerous that
to refuse their demands may be to endanger the Church herself.  True,
they generously disclaim all designs “to revolutionize the Church of
England” (p. 6 of _The Letter_).  This is well; but I am far more assured
by the belief that their power, as yet, is not so formidable as their
intentions.  And with this preface, I would pass to the subject-matter of
Dr. STANLEY’S _Letter_.




Scheme of Comprehension.


The point of departure taken for the discussion is the REVOLUTION of
1688, and the attempt then made at what was called “Comprehension.”  It
is even suggested that the “High Churchmen” of those days agreed that the
“very being of our Church was concerned” in abolishing “Subscription,”
and substituting for it a general declaration of conformity.  The several
attempts at “Comprehension” almost seem to be referred to as
substantially one, and are recommended to us as if originated by enlarged
and exemplary views of the Church’s calling.  But, equivocations apart,
(which would be wholly unworthy here), will this be gravely maintained?
Did the “Comprehension Scheme” of 1674 receive no opposition from the
Church? or will not every one own that it was frustrated by the
resistance of the Bishops?  Would Dr. STANLEY really say that the Scheme
(not “Act”) of 1689 was founded on a philosophy which would now command
assent?  I suppose that he must say it, or how could he refer to it as
our rebuke and pattern?  Yet it was, as he will not deny, a political
effort directed against the Roman Catholics; and the reluctance of the
clergy (even under all the pressure of the occasion) to fraternize with
Nonconformists, defeated the measure,—some of the principal Commissioners
who had to manage it, such as the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford, the
Prolocutor of Convocation, and the Bishop of Rochester, openly
withdrawing from it.  I really can hardly conceive of a more unfortunate
appeal to history.  To represent the clergy of all parties, and
especially “High Churchmen” (p. 33), as approving, on liberal principles,
of the proposed “Comprehension,” and covertly to suggest that
“Subscription” was alien from the spirit of those enlightened days, is,
to speak gently of it, quite “unhistorical”—(if I may so apply a now
familiar term); nor can I forbear to point to the fact that even
Dissenters were required, by the Act of 1 William and Mary, cap. 18, to
“subscribe” a declaration that “the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament were given by Divine Inspiration.”  The parallel breaks down at
every point.  Of course, if any one really thinks that England is now in
great danger (as in Sancroft’s days) from the Popish encroachments of the
CROWN, such an one is free to argue as Dr. STANLEY does.  If any suppose
that a Papal reaction among the populace is the present peril (as it was
thought to be in Burnet’s days), let them by all means fly to the
“remedial” measures of that era.  But for a philosophical historian to
quote, with admiration, Halifax or Nottingham, or refer to certain “High
Churchmen” with approval, can but cause a smile. {7}

It was a popular beginning of this subject, doubtless, to invoke the
memories of 1688 and the “Toleration Act,” in order to recommend to
English people this proposal to destroy “Subscription;” yet it was
dangerous.  For to have pursued the subject fairly from this point would
hardly have assisted the views of the abolitionists.  The course of
history would very soon have brought them to the great _Arian_ conspiracy
of 1772, the next noticeable effort to set aside the Articles of the
Church.  This, however, is altogether avoided, as if it were unknown to
Dr. STANLEY; and he quickly goes back to the Reformation, and even to the
times of the Primitive Church, to find arguments against “Subscription”
in the abstract, (as well as against our special Anglican form of
it,)—and, must I not say, to get out of the way of WHISTON, and the
“Feathers’ Tavern”?  Let us, then, be generous, and forgive the allusions
to 1688, and forget all that followed, and endeavour to examine on its
merits the substance of the “_Letter_.”



“Relaxation” a preliminary movement.


The object, my Lord, of the rising movement against “Subscription,” here
appears to be of a purely _preliminary_ character.  It is expressly
cleared of all connexion with special grievances.  “Revisions” are to
stand over.  These are understood to be reserved for future treatment (p.
4).  Meanwhile, it is not against the “Articles” only that the feeling is
to be stirred, but “Subscription” to the whole Prayer-book, and even to
the Bible (p. 51), is gently deprecated.  Indeed, it seems to be
maintained that our present “Subscription” to the Articles does not
include, as we had supposed, Subscription to the Bible at all.  The
objection, however, is scarcely raised in that form.  It is to
“Subscribing” _per se_ that the repugnance is felt, as though there were
a morbid dread of “putting the hand to paper,”—such as we sometimes find
in the uneducated classes.  And now it is not so much “do not sign
_these_ forms,” as “do not sign _any_ thing;” and Dr. Whately, and
Archdeacon Denison, and the friends of Mr. Gorham, Dr. Rowland Williams,
and Mr. Bristowe Wilson, and Mr. Heath are, as I understand, urged for
once to agree to “relax all subscriptions,” that they may so be set at
more liberty to fight their mutual battles without hindrance.  Thus it
is, wonderfully, to be claimed for members of a Christian Church, that
they should be positively pledged to nothing!




Revision of Prayer-book.


Lord EBURY’S measure in the House of Lords did not go this length,
because he had “Revision” more definitely in view; but his arguments
against one form of Subscription are equally valid against all, so that
its entire abrogation is, on his principles, only a question of time.
There is, however, substantial agreement.

It is most important that this should be understood, and that no false
issue be raised: and this is why I speak of the present proposal as one
for the Surrender of the Prayer-book.  Dr. STANLEY would ask nothing so
small as _altering_ Articles or Liturgy; a far simpler way he would show
us.  Revision would be mere ‘nibbling’ while Subscription remained.  An
Act of the Legislature might just “prohibit,” he says, (p. 32) all
“Subscription.”—Are men, then, so eager for it, that prohibition must be
resorted to?  He would not even leave it open to any one to sign; for
thus he triumphantly proceeds:—“_Not a word_ of the Articles need be
touched.  They would still be left as the exposition of the Faith of the
_Church of England in the eighteenth century_!—as the _standard_ of its
faith at the present day.  _Not a word_ of the Liturgy need be touched.
There are, no doubt, changes which would be acceptable to many, but THEY
MUST BE EFFECTED BY OTHER MEANS,” (p. 33.)—Surely, said the wise man, “in
vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird.”  To tell us beforehand
that we are to be coaxed into a general movement to get rid of
Subscription, and, that being done, we must reckon on the subsequent
change of the Prayer-book “by OTHER MEANS,” seems so very like an insult
to the understanding of men of all parties who believe anything, that I
can only explain it by calling to mind the proverbial blindness of genius
when hotly hastening to its own object, and forgetting how it looks to
all around.

But it may be said that I am overlooking that the Articles and
Prayer-book, though not “signed” or “subscribed,” might still remain—at
least, for a time—as what is called the “standard” of our doctrine.  Let
us inquire, then, what this means; for, unless we look it steadily in the
face, we shall be deluding ourselves again by an ambiguous word.  It is
suggested by the passage quoted from Burnet (p. 7), and in the argument
of Dr. STANLEY, that we English are generally governed in other matters
by Acts of Parliament,—and why not in religion?  We are not expected to
“subscribe” the law of the land, but simply to acquiesce, and submit to
it.  It is not binding on the conscience, but only on external obedience.
A man may stand up and read a Statute to others—and then argue against
it.  While it exists as law, he must be judged and ruled by it; but he is
free to dislike it, and may labour to change it.  This is the parallel
suggested, or if it be not, I have no idea of what is intended; and I
must say, that when thus nakedly looked at, it is the most unveiled
Erastianism avowed in our times, if we except Mr. BRISTOWE WILSON’S in
his Essay.  It is what we might expect of Burnet, but scarcely of Dr.
STANLEY, to make the Prayer-book “a legal standard,” but not a matter of
belief: it simply astonishes us.  When a great statesman of the last age
told us that our religion was but a “schedule of an Act of Parliament,”
we could at least reply that “ex animo” Subscription makes it _our own_;
but to ask us now to take away even this, seems almost to sever all
connexion between the Church of England and the moral agency of her
Ministers.  The Act of 1662, and its “schedule,” the Prayer-book, might
be our “standard” till the next session, and might claim as much
reverence as any other old Act of Parliament,—but no more.  Put the whole
proposal, then, of Dr. STANLEY, and of Mr. WILSON, and others into plain
English, and it is this—(and I ask to be corrected if I misinterpret
it)—“_Let the clergy in future sign_ NOTHING, _but let them consent to
adopt and use what the_ PARLIAMENT _may from time to time authorise_.”

The object, then, being thus simplified, we need not here pause to
estimate the excellences or defects of any of the formularies which we
all alike have thought to be good enough to _sign_.  With more than
judicial fairness, Dr. STANLEY admits that the whole Thirty-nine Articles
are “incomparably superior” to the “Nine Articles of the Evangelical
Alliance” (p. 11), or any that would be drawn up by “the dominant
factions” of our Church, _or Commonwealth_.  But this kind of criticism
may well be postponed till the prior question is disposed of—whether we
should “sign” _any_ thing?  When the Articles and Prayer-book come to be
hereafter discussed, these details may have interest with some, as parts
of the literature of the “_Eighteenth Century_;” but at present might it
not be disrespectful merely to glance at them in a sketchy way, to give
pungency and interest to a somewhat barren subject?  I do not say that
the highly rhetorical sentences in which praise and blame are judiciously
administered by Dr. STANLEY to Article 1, 5, 9, or 34, contribute nothing
to the effectiveness of the pamphlet with the “general reader;” but it is
obvious that with the argument, strictly speaking, they have nothing to
do.



Dr. Stanley’s Three Arguments.


The Relaxation of Subscription appears, as far as I can gather, to be
urged by three arguments,—the first founded the _origin_ of the
“Subscriptions” among us after the Reformation; the second, on the
alleged absence of “Subscription” in the Primitive Church; and the third
on the practical evils of the present state of “Subscription” in the
Church and in the Universities.  If I examine each of these, I shall not,
I think, have omitted any point hitherto prominently alleged in this
controversy.

I.  “The Church of England, as such, recognises absolutely no
Subscriptions.”  Such is Dr. STANLEY’S proposition (p. 38).  The tests of
membership are “incorporated in the Services to the exclusion, as it
would seem, of all besides.”  It is added (p. 39)—“These other
obligations were, in fact, _not contemplated_ at the time of the first
compilation of the Prayer-book and Articles, and have grown up as a mere
excrescence through the pressure of political and ecclesiastical parties.
The Articles were not subscribed (by anything like general usage) till
the 12th year of Elizabeth; they were then, after much hesitation and
opposition, ordered to be subscribed for a special purpose,” &c.


The Reformation.


Is it possible to suppose that Dr. STANLEY means this for a fair
representation of the spirit and design of the Church of England, from
the beginning of the Reformation to the 12th year of Elizabeth?  He
writes as though the Articles were all really to be signed, and the
Prayer-book all settled, and that the Church during all that time
deliberately intended to leave her members such freedom of opinion as he
and others would now restore.  If he does not mean this, his argument
falls to the ground.  But what are the facts of the case?

Elizabeth ascended the throne at the close of the year 1558.  Every
position of trust throughout the country was then held by Roman
Catholics.  The bishops and the clergy were generally devoted to Rome.
The Convocation met, in two months, and drew up Articles presented to
Parliament, which are described as “flat against Reformation, and
_subscribed_ by most of the University.”  Even Cambridge is said to have
given her approval.  At such a crisis, it was evident that some years
must elapse before any such Revision of Edward VI.’s Articles could be
hoped for, as would obtain general consent.  But to represent this pause
as a kind of freedom from “Subscription” enjoyed in earlier and more
liberal times, to say that “the Church,” at least, was ignorant of this
device, when “Subscription” to certain “Articles” was the first step
which the Convocation and the Universities naturally took, immediately
Elizabeth came to the throne, surprises me beyond what I like to express.
The “general reader” is entirely at the mercy of so eloquent a writer as
Dr. STANLEY, and it is not too much to ask that he use his power with a
little generosity; or if he will not, it becomes imperative that his
representations be translated into a humbler style, that the world may
judge how they look.  The facts of the case are, in truth, opposed to all
that Dr. STANLEY’S argument requires.  Instead of the twenty years and
more, which preceded Elizabeth’s 12th year, being years in which the
Church of the Reformation adopted laxity as its principle, the whole of
the period, from the beginning of the reign of Edward to the year 1571
(with the exception of the brief interval of Mary’s government), was
occupied in a careful effort on the part of the Reformers to tie down
both clergy and laity by the strictest body of ecclesiastical law,
perhaps, ever attempted to be enacted in the Christian world.


The Reformatio Legum.


I refer, of course, to the “Reformatio Legum.”  The Archbishop of
Canterbury, the subsequently-elect Archbishop of York, and certain
suffragans; great Reformers, such as Peter Martyr and Rowland Taylour;
known scholars, such as Sir John Cheke and Dr. Haddon, were engaged in
this business, which was looked to as the crowning act of the Reformation
of Religion.  Archbishop Parker took up the work which Cranmer had begun,
and even pressed it on the reluctant Queen as far as he dared.


Subscription demanded in 1553.


The connexion of the _Reformatio Legum_ with the Articles of our Church,
and the light which they throw on each other, I need not point out to any
who are acquainted with the history of our Church at that time.  The
Forty-two Articles, from which our Thirty-nine were, ten years
afterwards, derived, were first published in 1553.  In the November of
the preceding year, Cranmer proposed that the bishops should have them at
once _subscribed_ throughout their dioceses.  The death of King Edward
prevented this from being accomplished.  They were revised and subscribed
by Convocation in 1563, in the name of the whole clergy of England.  The
early chapters of the _Reformatio Legum_ contain the doctrine of the
Articles, and were, no doubt, intended to be an authorized exposition of
them.  How strict a system was meant to be inaugurated by the Reformers
may be judged by even a superficial perusal of that Book.  Heresy and
blasphemy were to be punishable by death.  Adultery was to be visited
with imprisonment and even banishment.  Impenitent persons were to be
“handed over to the civil power.”  All this was the sort of Discipline
which was waiting to be put in force as soon as the Reformers could
persuade the nation to bear it;—and yet this is the supposed time when
Subscription was alien from the mind of the Reformed Church!


Temporary restriction of the Clergy.
Subscription in 1564.


But during this interval of twelve years, while the bishops were doing
their best to bring the clergy and people to Uniformity, and preparing
them for the “Discipline” which was openly clamoured for, we find that
immediately after the Articles were published, “advertisements” came out
by authority further to restrain the liberty of the preachers.  In 1564,
the clergy, who had by their proctors subscribed the Articles in
Convocation, were required “to protest and _subscribe_” that they would
not preach at all without special license from the bishop, but “only read
that which is appointed by public authority:” and further, that they
would “observe, keep, and maintain, all the rites, ceremonies, good
usages and order” set forth by the Act of Uniformity.  Here then was
“Subscription” to the whole Prayer-book as it then stood.  And, indeed,
even three years before, the “readers” in Churches were obliged, by
“Subscriptions” to certain injunctions, to execute their office within
prescribed and narrow limits.  The state of things doubtless was still
felt on all hands to be but provisional.  The great Roman Catholic party
waited, without separating formally.  The Puritans were stirring
themselves in the cause of “Discipline:” it was hoped by both parties
that some change might, from the lapse of a few years, better their
position.  The latter reckoned on the more aged of the old Popish Clergy
dying out; the former were encouraged by a fanatical prophecy to expect
the death of the Queen herself in the twelfth year of her reign; but
after that time the Puritan and Popish parties became openly defined,
while the Church had as yet no such “Discipline” as could hold her
members together at all, except by the Court of Commissioners.  It was to
restrain both parties, then, that recourse was once more had to
“Subscription.”

Can there be need, my Lord, to pursue any further an inquiry into so well
known a piece of history as this?  I should not have said so much, had
not the Ecclesiastical History Professor declared that Subscriptions and
Declarations of Faith were “not in fact _contemplated_ at the time of the
first compilation of the Prayer Book and Articles;” that Subscription is
“superfluous,” “needless,” “capricious,” “extrinsic,” and “accidental,”
(pp. 38, 39), “and that the Church of England, as such, recognises
absolutely no Subscriptions!”  I submit to your Lordship, that the Church
of England “at the time of the first compilation of the Articles and
Prayer Book,” encouraged no freedom whatever to diverge from the one or
the other—demanded Subscription (by Cranmer) in 1553—_obtained_ it from
all the bishops and representatives of the clergy in Convocation in
1563—and laboured to restrain both Papists and Puritans within more and
more rigid limits year by year, till by the thirteenth of Elizabeth
“Subscription” was universally enforced, as the only practical substitute
for that Ecclesiastical Discipline which was refused.

I have purposely abstained from here noticing minor inaccuracies which
singularly abound in the learned Professor’s letter, and have kept to the
main point.  His position is that since the twelfth year of Elizabeth, a
stern and gradual growth of Subscription has superseded the liberal
system of the earlier years in which the tolerant Church “knew
_absolutely nothing_ of Subscription!”  Without this, again I say, his
argument comes utterly to an end.  It will be useless to weigh syllables,
and retreat upon the _ipsissima verba_ of the Letter.  The broad
representation means this, or it is _nihil ad rem_.  And the whole
history of the period is again, directly the reverse of the
representation given by Dr. STANLEY. {18}



The Primitive Church.


II.  I pass, then, to the next point—the alleged absence of Subscription
in the primitive age.  Not content with the reference to the history of
our own Church, Dr. STANLEY says:—“I will not confine myself to these
isolated instances, but examine the history of Subscription from the
first.  For the first three centuries the Church was _entirely without
it_.” “The first Subscription to a series of dogmatical propositions as
such was that enforced by Constantine at the Council of Nicæa.  It was
the natural, but rude, expedient of a half-educated soldier to enforce
unanimity in the Church as he had by the sword enforced it in the
empire.” (p. 35).  Again, I am painfully compelled to meet the statements
of Dr. STANLEY with a direct negative.  The case is _not_ as he states
it.  A “rude soldier,” in those days—(when comparatively few people
_wrote_ at all)—would not, I think, have been likely to invent this
“expedient:” but, in fact, he _did not_ invent it.


Council against Paulus Samosatemus.


I do not suppose for a moment that Dr. STANLEY could care to make a
merely _technical_ statement as to the mode in which adhesion was
signified to a dogmatic series of propositions.  No merely formal
position of that kind could serve the argument.  The position which he
lays down must be that, before the time of Constantine, there was that
_freedom_ allowed which is demanded by those who object to Subscription
now,—that people were not, in those days, called on to profess their
belief in any set of “dogmatical” statements as tests of orthodoxy.  If,
then, he will look back sixty-six years before the Council of Nicæa, to
the Council of Antioch (of which Constantine was quite innocent), against
Paul of Samosata, there he will find the copy of a letter from certain
orthodox bishops, Hymenæus, Theophilus, Theoctenus, Maximus, Proclus, and
Bolanus, setting forth a series of dogmatical propositions, more minute
and lengthened than those of Nicæa, and concluding with these words—Ταῦτα
ἀπὸ πλείστων ὀλίγα σημειωσάμενοι, Βουλόμεθα μαθεῖν, εἰ τὰ αὐτὰ φρονεῖς
ἡμῖν καὶ διδάσκεις, καὶ ὑποσημειώσασθαι σε, εἰ ἀρέσκη, τοῖς
προγεγραμμένοις, ῆ οὐ.  If he would not write, he must make his mark—give
some sign, at all events—whether he “held and taught” as there set forth
in writing (προγεγραμμένοις)—yes or no; or submit to lose his office in
the Church—(καθαιρεθῆναι.)—_Routh’s Rel._ ii. p. 465, &c.


Council against Noetus.


A few years earlier, the case of Noetus was treated in a similar way.
The assembled Presbyters, after confessing the orthodox faith, cast out
the heretic for _not submitting to it_.  The Council of Eliberis, in
Spain (before the Nicene Council), put out eighty-one canons, or
chapters, of a mixed kind, dogmatical and disciplinary, “et Post
_Subscriptiones_ Episcoporum in vetusto codice Urgelensi leguntur
sequentes presbyterorum,” &c.—_Routh_, iv. 44.  Doctrine of Novatian
severity is there put forth: I refer to it not for any other purpose than
to adduce the _fact_ of Subscription—(and Subscription, too, in the
presence of the laity),—or at least the fact, that there was no
authorized laxity in those days, such as Dr. STANLEY’S argument requires.


Discipline in the Church.


And here I would remark, my Lord, on the obvious difference between a
state of the Church in which there was a system of DISCIPLINE holding
together the whole body, and a condition like our own, when Discipline is
acknowledged to be extinct among us.  When bishops met together
periodically, as they then did, to regulate the affairs of the
Church,—and stood in mutual awe of each other’s spiritual powers;—when
dismissal from Communion was a chastisement shrunk from, by laity and
clergy, with terror,—it might have been easy to do without such
Subscriptions as now attempt to guard the orthodoxy of our people.  So
again in the Pre-Reformation Church; the organization of the hierarchy,
and the necessary submission of the people, might often render
Subscriptions more than superfluous—unintelligible.  Let those who would
take away the present Subscription to our Prayer-book, restore to us, in
a fair measure, the active Discipline of the Apostolic and post Apostolic
times, and I for one will thankfully hail the change.  But to ask to
return to the “first three centuries,”—bristling as they do with canons,
synodical and episcopal letters, and declarations,—because a volume was
not then presented for the signature of every candidate for Orders,—is as
reasonable as it would be to propose now to abolish printing, and go back
to the simplicity and “freedom” of oral instruction and the scantiest of
manuscript literature.  There is no fallacy more glittering, but none
more unworthy, illogical, and self-condemning than that of false
historical parallel.  And I again must ask your Lordship, whether Dr.
STANLEY’S appeal to the Primitive History has not wholly failed?—I have
briefly shown that Constantine was not the originator of Subscriptions to
creeds or canons, but that subscribing or professing dogmatic assent was
a Christian custom of the earlier ages.  It is plain to every one who
knows the history, _e.g._, of a great bishop like St. Cyprian or St.
Irenæus, or of a great writer like Tertullian or Origen, that to guard
dogmatically against heresy, by every means in their power, was the
predominating idea of their whole course, however imperfectly attained;
and they would have been utterly astounded if any one had foretold that
in a future age of the Church, when all Discipline had been destroyed
among CHRIST’S people, a Professor of History would appeal to _their_
example as a justification of the proposal to excuse all ministers of
Christ from signing any Articles of Faith!


Roman Catholic Subscription.


But when we are even told by Dr. STANLEY (p. 36, n.) that, “from the
clergy of the Roman Catholic Church no _declaration of belief_ is
required at their Ordination,” we almost cease to be surprised at his
allegations respecting the ante-Nicene age.  One would have thought it
very little trouble to look into the present Roman Pontifical, and see
the service for Ordination of Priests, before making any such statement.
Unless Dr. STANLEY’S copy is very different from mine—(Antverpiæ
_Ex-officina Plantiniana_ Balthasaris Moreti, 1663)—he will read thus:—

    “Pontifex, accepta mitra, vertit se ad presbyteros ordinatos qui ante
    altare coram ipso stantes _profitentur Fidem_ quam prædicaturi sunt,
    dicentes CREDO, &c., &c.”



Protestant Subscriptions.


I think that I need add no more on this head: but I will refer to the
Subscriptions of Protestant Churches, before I pass on.  It is very
commonly said at present that “Subscription” does not secure the
Uniformity of opinion which it aims at, and thus shows itself to be as
useless as it is vexatious,—(as if, forsooth, any one supposed that
absolute uniformity of thought could be attained by any means in the
world).  Dr. STANLEY has not omitted this; but once more I must hold him
to facts.

“It was one of the misfortunes,” (he says, p. 36) “incident to the
Reformation, that every Protestant Church by way of defending itself
against the enemies that hemmed it in, or that _were supposed to_ hem it
in on every side, was induced to compile each for itself a _new_
Confession of Faith.”—This is scarcely doing justice to our Protestant
friends, _in limine_.  They had to do something more than defend
themselves against enemies; they had to form some bond of union among
themselves.  If they were not to be merely scattered units, to be
attracted in time to the largest bodies near them, they were obliged to
find some principle of cohesion among themselves; and they who refuse to
allow them to make “articles” or “confessions” ought in charity to
suggest some other plan.  To have separated from a compact body like the
Roman Church and profess _nothing_ positive, was surely an impossible
course.—But Dr. STANLEY further says, “The excess of Subscription on the
continent over-leaped itself and has led to its gradual extinction, or
modification.” (p. 37.)

It seems to me a very narrow philosophy which thus disposes of so great a
fact as this, that “_every_ Protestant Church” had this sort of instinct
of life and self-preservation.  Is it not as legitimate at least to infer
that there may have been something in the very nature of things to prompt
this unanimity of action?  And is there no lesson to be learned from the
undoubted fact that none of the Protestant communities have preserved
their original standard, but have descended towards neology everywhere in
proportion as “Subscription” has been set aside? and that the Church of
England has for three hundred years exhibited a singular uniformity of
belief, while maintaining her Subscriptions?  Practically, I see nothing,
then, in the example of Foreign Protestantism to encourage the proposed
relaxation; but everything the reverse.  Even the small and diminishing
bodies of Nonconformists in England have failed, (notwithstanding their
gaining in orthodoxy by their proximity to us), to keep up their
reputation,—as their ablest men allow.  But what would have been their
condition, if, like ourselves, they had had no Discipline? {24}  Surely
in their efforts at holy Discipline they all bear a witness for CHRIST
which puts us to shame.

Let Dr. STANLEY, if he can, find any Christian body without
Discipline—without Confessions, without Articles, without Subscriptions,
which has been able to preserve itself at all; for until he does so, we
must tell him that _all_ the facts are against him.



Alleged practical evils of Subscription.


III.  I now, my Lord, must pass to the third topic, in the consideration
of which I thought to include all that remains in Dr. STANLEY’S pamphlet
which could be supposed by any to be of argumentative value—viz., the
alleged practical evils of “Subscription” in the Church and the
University.  Here I feel that our English people will take a deeper
interest in the matter, than in any antiquarian or historical
disquisitions; and here Dr. STANLEY and his friends speak with a
confidence which with many will pass at once for demonstration.  And if
there were grounds to suppose that a method of Subscription, like ours,
worked such mischief as they say who call for this change, no traditions
of the Revolution, or of the Reformation, or of the Primitive Church,
ought to tempt us to retain it.  But let us not put the matter in an
unreal light, while pretending to go back to former and better days.
Freedom to think as you please in Religion, while retaining your place in
the Church, was never conceded at any of the times to which Dr. STANLEY
has appealed; but was foreign to the principles of every class of
Christians.  Yet if the evils of Subscriptions are such as we are now
assured, things cannot be suffered to remain as they are.

But broad assertions can frequently be only met by like broad assertions;
and I hope that I shall not be thought disrespectful if I thus treat some
now before me.


“Contradictoriness” of the Articles and Prayer-book.


(1.)  It is said that the Subscriptions are made to documents
“contradictory to each other in spirit;” (p. 22) and that this is felt by
those who are called on to sign the Prayer-book, and the Articles;—the
former being devotional and sublime, the latter scholastic, and less
impressive;—the former emanating from ancient sources, the latter being
the product “of the Calvinistic, and in some measure even the Scholastic
period.” (pp. 16, 17.)  This is popularly but scarcely correctly put; but
I would ask, whether the difference between the “two documents” is
greater than between Aquinas’ _Summa_, and his _Pange Lingua_?—or between
any man’s didactic statements and his devotional offices?  And if not,
then how cannot the same man honestly sign both—each in its plain and
obvious sense?  Personally, I do not feel the least difficulty in the
case; and I cannot recollect meeting with any clergyman who could sign
the one, and yet had difficulty about the other, except as to a few
phrases here and there.  The general “contradictoriness,” which is
affirmed by Dr. STANLEY, I believe then is not commonly perceived by the
Clergy, and I do not myself perceive any other difference than the nature
of the case demands.  The purely Theological language of the earlier
Articles—then the mixed statements of the “anthropology,” as it is
called—and the terms of the Sacramental Articles,—may almost in every
instance be traced in Catholic fathers, from St. Augustine to St.
Bernard.  And yet they are not recondite, but so intelligible to educated
English people, that some years ago as a matter of edification I went
through them, with a class of fifty of the laity in my parish, and a few
clergy, who for several weeks were glad to devote attention to the
subject; and I venture to think that the idea never occurred to one of
us, that there was the least want of harmony between the two documents.
We really did not see the “calm image of Cranmer” reflected on the
surface of the “Liturgy,” as Lord Macaulay fancied he did (p. 18); and as
to the “foul weeds in which the roots were buried,” we did not discover
them there;—(nor did Lord Macaulay, I suppose, as it was not his custom
to go to these “roots.”)  I think I am entitled, then, to meet the charge
of the “contradictoriness” of the Articles and the Prayer-book, with an
assertion that there is a thorough inward harmony, which not a few of us
feel; and we cannot be talked out of this conviction by the contrary
assertions of microscopic thinkers.  I should grant, of course, that it
would be a “practical evil” of no small kind, demanding immediate
redress, if I could admit any real opposition between the Formularies
which we have to sign.  But I unreservedly deny it.  I know indeed what
objectors would mean when they say this: but I know also that the same
objectors would find “contradictoriness” in different parts of Holy
Scripture; and I am thankful that I do not find it, after many years’
steady work at both Old Testament and New.


The early age of those who “subscribe.”


(2.)  Another alleged grievance, or “practical evil,” is said to be the
age {28} at which young men are called on to make these important
professions of their belief.  I had, many years since, to encounter the
same objection in another form.  I met with some among the Baptists, who
objected to teaching children to “say their prayers,” on the ground that
they could not understand the mysterious subjects implied; and others who
would not ask them to believe any thing in Religion, until they had
proved it.  The “practical evil” is—and I am sure that your Lordship will
agree with me—altogether on the side of those who leave the young thus to
make their own opinions, and find their faith how they can.  The Bible
is, in many respects, a more complex book than the Prayer-book; and yet I
can ask my child to put entire faith in it, as God’s Word.  Nor can the
faithful Churchman, I believe, feel any difficulty in giving into the
hands of young and old, the Formularies which have been his own comfort
and help hitherto, and asking their “assent and consent” to all that
which he knows to be true.


Men of ability will not take Holy Orders.


(3.)  There is a “practical evil,” which has of late been greatly pressed
on public notice, which Dr. STANLEY thus refers to (p. 30)—“Intelligent,
thoughtful, highly educated young men, who twenty or thirty years ago
were to be found in every Ordination, are gradually withheld from the
service of the Church, and from the profession to which their tastes,
their characters, and their gifts, best fit them.”

This is an evil, the existence of which I shall not question—it is indeed
too plain, and too alarming to admit of any doubt.  But I deny that it
has any foundation in the practice of Subscription; which has not been
changed, or made more rigid, in our days.  I have never known one
conscientious, thoughtful young churchman kept from Holy Orders by a
shrinking from Subscription.  They who have shrunk have been persons who
_differ_ from the Church, and _acknowledge_ the fact.  They have been
men, like my upright friend Mr. Fisher,—the author of “Liturgical
Revision,”—who would not, for all the temptations that might be offered,
use the entire Offices of our Church, even if ordained immediately
without Subscription.  Subscription keeps them out, of course.  It is
meant to do so, if it has any meaning at all.  But if we look around us
at the state of things in the Church, during the twenty or thirty years
to which Dr. STANLEY alludes, we shall not find it difficult to ascertain
causes which have kept, and will keep, so many intelligent and
conscientious minds of the higher order, from entering the ministry of
the Church.  Young men of ability in the last generation, if designed for
Holy Orders, gave themselves to Theological study.  But we all remember
the panic which arose in consequence of the secessions to the Roman
Church.  Public patronage and popular feeling were then so successfully
worked on, by the fanatical portion of the press, that the bare rumour of
“Theological learning” was enough to mark any Churchman for suspicion.
Parents who did not wish their more gifted sons to be victims, chose for
them other callings, and found a thousand new and attractive openings in
the Civil service.  Youths of greatest promise saw encouragement in other
professions, and rewards in the distance for successful merit; but if
they began to read Theology, they soon found themselves obliged to pause.
To read St. Augustine, till you began to believe the ancient doctrine of
Baptism, was fatal: to study Church history, or the Liturgies, was still
worse,—if men did it honestly.  Hundreds, I believe, were thus beaten
off.  Parents and guardians and friends could not desire social and
professional neglect—if not worse—for those in whom they were interested.
They saw and said, that “there was but little chance for a clever man,”
if he had the stigma of high ability or learning.  If such a man as Dr.
MILL—to whose writings men readily seek, now that the infidel is at our
doors—if he died in comparative obscurity and neglect, what could others
look for?  The evil is done, and none now living will see it completely
undone.—

To crush the principles of old Churchmanship was not, however, a task to
which the rising intellect of Oxford would lend itself; it retired and
left that work to others; or it strayed into German literature, whither
the popular hatred had not yet learned to track it: and now the wail goes
forth from “Charge” after “Charge,” that men of higher minds have fled,
or turned “neologians!”  Is there no Nemesis here?—A few years since, the
Church’s rapid descent from her position of ancient learning was regarded
with a quiet despair by some even of our most thoughtful men.  A late
dignitary even expressed “thankfulness” on one occasion at some
moderate-looking promotion that had been made in high places, and he was
remonstrated with by one who knew the entire ignorance of theology of the
clergyman who had just been honoured.  “Why, he is wholly ignorant of
Christianity!” was, I believe, the exclamation.  “Yes,” was the answer,
“but he is not _hostile_ to it.”

But will any relaxation of “Subscription”—will the destruction of the
Articles, or the Revision of the Liturgy by “the Association” set up of
late, bring back Theological learning, or tempt the “higher minds” into
the Church’s ranks?  No one can imagine it.  A great misfortune has
happened to us, and the way to repair it is not easily seen; but it is
something to see the evil itself.  The Romanizing movement was a great
misfortune: we all deplore it, even those who know that it was provoked
by the narrow-minded treatment which it received.  But the loss of
Theology and high intellect is a greater misfortune by far; and this will
be yet found, when the dulness of a coming generation has to defend the
Bible apart from the Church.



The Athanasian Creed.


(4.)  In discussing the “practical evils” of Subscription, I observe that
Dr. STANLEY occasionally singles out parts of our “Formularies,” as
involving special difficulty, and embarrassing “subscribers” in a more
painful way than others.  More than once he mentions the Creed of St.
Athanasius as a peculiar hardship.  In the first place, he somewhat
roughly and unfairly charges _falsehood_ on the Article for calling it
St. Athanasius’s (p. 13); but surely he would not mean to charge
falsehood on the Prayer-book, for speaking of the “_Apostles_ Creed”—and
yet the Apostles did not write it,—or of the “_Nicene_ Creed,” although
the latter part of it be not Nicene?  The meaning is so plain and easy,
that I own that I wonder at the tone of Dr. STANLEY here. {32}  The Creed
“commonly _called_ Athanasian” is surely a good description of a document
which expresses well the truth which Athanasius defended, and the Church,
by saying “commonly called,” expressly refrains from certifying his
authorship.  But the admission of the Creed itself is the evident
grievance, and so there is anger at the very name.  To this, then, I will
address myself.

“As a doctrine most explicitly asserted by the Liturgy,” Dr. STANLEY
mentions “the condemnation of _all members_ of the Eastern Church, as
maintained by the clauses of the Athanasian Creed, which appear to
declare that those who refuse to acknowledge the HOLY GHOST to proceed
from the FATHER and the SON, without doubt perish everlastingly.”  An
“eminent prelate” twenty years ago, we are told, expressed a devout hope
that, “for the honour of human nature, no one now would deliberately
aver” this!  I hope I shall not seem to be harsh if I say I would here
put in one word “for the honour” of common sense, which seems shocked by
such treatment of such subjects.  We might as fairly say, that the words,
“Whosoever will be saved must thus _think_ of the Trinity,” consign all
infants, and persons of little understanding, to everlasting perdition,
because they cannot “think” of it at all.  It is trifling to confound the
_intellectual_ reception of a doctrine with its _saving_ reception, and
it is saying that none but very clever people will be saved.  Such
confusion is equivalent to a rejection of even the simplest form of
Creed.  Take for example the Ethiopian’s confession, “I believe that
JESUS CHRIST is the SON of GOD,” on which he was baptized (Acts viii.
37).  For the intellectual conception here demands explanation at once.
In what sense is He the SON of GOD?  Are we not all “HIS offspring?”  IS
JESUS the SON of GOD as man? or as GOD?—or both?  If HIS SON, is He
Eternal?—and soon.  Such questions are _inevitable_, if we would really
_know_ our meaning in saying, “JESUS CHRIST is the SON of GOD.”  But
important as a right understanding of truth assuredly is, no Church ever
thus taught that intellectual reception of truth could be attained by the
multitude, for whose salvation we labour.  If, indeed, we could look into
the mind of the majority of good Christians, and see the shape which
doctrines there take, we should often find the greatest amount of heresy
of the intellect co-existing with orthodoxy of heart.  A statement thus
drawn out at length in a Creed is the Church’s intellectual exposition,
as far as it goes, of the Doctrine professed.  The million may not know
this; but the Church tells them—“If you hold the true doctrine, _this_ is
_what_, consciously or not, you are holding.”  The Athanasian Creed is a
_statement_ of that truth which dwells in every Christian heart.  We know
that God’s grace in the soul is always “orthodox;” but “with the heart
man believeth unto righteousness;” but the Creed forbids the intellect to
misinterpret what the heart has savingly known.—The agreement with the
Eastern Church attempted at the Council of Florence illustrates this; for
it was evidently on this basis.  The Greeks were not told that their
forefathers had all perished, but that their _expression_ of the truth
which they held was less perfect than the Latin.

It may be very easy to misrepresent what is thus said; but few, on
reflection, will venture to say the opposite.  Dr. STANLEY would not say
that _no_ truth in Scripture is “necessary to salvation?”  He would not
say that _no_ doctrine of any Creed is “necessary to salvation?”  But yet
he would not say that right intellectual conceptions of any truth, or of
any doctrine, are “necessary to salvation?”  And as he _would_ own that
_some_ faith is necessary, or a “grace of faith” (the “Habitus Fidei” of
the Schools), he must own, therefore, that saving faith, however
unintellectual, is, as I said, orthodox.  To “hold the Faith” is one
thing; to apprehend its intellectual expression is another.  And if all
this be undeniable, what sad unreality it is, to write and speak, as so
many do of the Athanasian Creed, as if it required a comprehension of all
the terms which it uses!—instead of a pure “holding” of the TRUTH, which
it would explain to all capable of the explanation.

I have dwelt at this length on a single point because, even in our
journals and periodicals, so much obstinate nonsense—pardon me, my Lord,
for such plainness—is frequently uttered against a Creed to which, under
GOD, England now probably owes her undeniably deep faith in the
TRINITY.—To sign the Athanasian Creed being thus beyond dispute to sign
the DOCTRINE, and not to say that each expression of it is infallible, or
_down to the level of all men_, there can be no more objection to
Subscription of that Creed, than of the Apostles’ or the Nicene.


Equivocal subscribing.


(5.)  Yet one more “evil” alleged to flow from the present practice of
“Subscription” must be noticed,—the necessity which it throws on _all_ of
us to sign in a qualified, and therefore not straightforward sense.
“From the Archbishop in his palace at Lambeth to the humblest curate in
the wilds of Cumberland,” says Dr. STANLEY, “all must go out,” if only
the “obvious” and “natural” meaning of the whole Prayer-book be insisted
on.—I really feel, my Lord, on reading these words, very much as I should
on hearing from a foreigner anything very ultra and impossible about
England—_e.g._, that “we have no religion at all in England;” (we are
told, indeed, that in Spain we are thought to be an infidel people).  The
only answer, in such case, is to inform the foreigner as to the facts;
point to our churches, our schools, our parishes, our homes.  In truth,
Dr. STANLEY here seems to me to write like one who does not know us at
all.  I say for myself (and I believe that thousands would do the same),
that I subscribe both Articles and Prayer-book in their obvious, easy,
and most congruous sense, and believe them to express, if not always in
the words which I should have chosen, yet always in suitable words, my
inward convictions of Christian truth.  Indeed, my Lord, I can understand
nothing else.  I have moved very freely for many years among my brethren,
and I can but say that my experience of them as a body does not in any
degree correspond with the representation which Dr. STANLEY makes, which
I think will surprise both our friends and our enemies.  I can do no
more, of course, than simply protest {36} against it with all my heart;
believing fully that when the Articles and the Prayer-book are
interpreted, not with “Chinese” perverseness, but honestly and humanly,
they are ordinarily found accordant with reason, with Scripture, and with
themselves.

The possible haste with which Dr. STANLEY seems to have written, may
account, perhaps, for statements so unqualified as these, and some others
that he has made.  Indeed, there are things put out in _the Letter_ which
can only be thus explained.  I refer, for instance, to such assertions as
that, (p. 4) which,—forgetting the whole calendar of Lessons, (and also
the Article vi.), says,—“The Articles and Liturgy express _no opinion_ as
to the authorship of _the disputed_ {37} or anonymous books of
Scripture,”—and then in a note mentions the “Visitation of the Sick” as
the only portion of the “Liturgy” (_sic_)—which refers a disputed book
(the “Hebrews”) to its author; though the service for Holy Matrimony
equally refers that Epistle to St. Paul.  Or, as another instance, I may
name Dr. STANLEY’S conceiving the indiscriminate use of our Burial
Service to imply some theory about the happiness of all hereafter.  (So I
understand him, at least, p. 19.)—Or, yet another; his supposing (p. 45)
that the description of our “Canonical Books” as those of whose authority
there was _no doubt_ “_in the Church_,” could possibly mean “no doubt in
the minds of any _individuals_!”  But, my Lord, my object is not to find
fault with any one; I had to show, as I hope I have shown, the fallacy of
the grounds on which the surrender of Subscription to the Prayer-book has
been urged.



Summary.


It has been seen that the “Comprehension” scheme of the Revolution,—the
design of the English Reformation,—and the custom of the Early Church,
which had all been appealed to, _all_ fail to give the least support to
the theory of license now put forward.  It has been seen, that no real
argument against Subscription has been deduced from the practice of it
among ourselves, or from the character of our Formularies.  I might have
gone farther.  I might have marked the Providential nature of the events
which held our vessel by the anchor of Subscription, at a time when it
must have otherwise drifted on rocks.  I might have pointed to the
unhappy results which thus far have attended relaxations of Subscription,
in a change of _tone_ among a large number of the younger members of the
Church and the University, and an acknowledged failure at length of the
supply of candidates for Holy Orders.  But there is no need that I should
enlarge on details which are patent to all observation.  It is becoming
that I should bring these remarks to a conclusion.

I should be sorry, indeed, my Lord, if it could be thought from my
deprecating the proposed abolition of Subscription, that I regard the
condition of the Church among us as a normal or satisfactory one.  But I
feel, as thousands do, that whatever changes may lie before us, they
should be towards increased _organization of_ our Body; while the present
proposal would disorganize us at once, and break away the traditions by
which, in an undisciplined age, Providence protected us.  This proposal,
I am aware, unhappily falls in with the spirit of our times—a spirit of
independence and freedom, rather than of holiness and faith, and
therefore I fear that it will find a wide advocacy among those who desire
not the maintenance of our Church’s distinctive position among the
Churches of Europe.  Your Lordship’s eloquent hope—admirable and
strong—that we may yet “maintain that Eternal Truth of which the Church
is the depository, and that Form of sound words in which that Eternal
Truth has been handed down,” I fain would share.  But I stand in doubt.
I feel very much like one who is asked to take leave of a peaceful
abode—a haven of long Providential refuge; and I take, perhaps, a
partial, because parting look at the solid advantages hitherto
secured—the homely, perhaps, but very real blessings of a Fixed Faith for
our people in general, with Means of Grace, capable of enlargement
everywhere according to our need, venerable Traditions protecting our
noble English Bibles, our glorious English Offices, our restored English
Churches.  The thought of turning one’s back on all, and pushing out on
the boundless ocean of opinion, may well fill the heart with
foreboding—if not for oneself, yet for others!



Prospects.


A solemn future, it may be, is before us as a Church.  You have come, my
Lord, to the government of this great central Diocese at a crisis
unparalleled in our history.  The eighteenth century was a great truce of
principles.  The truce was probably broken in 1829; efforts were made to
re-establish the truce once more, but not with much success.  The
Established Church, seemed hastening to become an established theory
only.  But new life from God entered into her.  She again delivered her
message to the growing masses of the people,—and with an energy before
but rarely known.  True, our “Discipline” is not restored; but the voice
of Worship is heard rising anew on every hand.—True, there is no
startling growth of Sanctity—(the special token of a Church’s life!); but
there is a very real zeal to do a work for CHRIST on earth.  With all the
experience of an eventful Past to warn us, and the vast range of Sacred
Ministrations still remaining, might it not be the glorious distinction
of your Lordship’s Episcopate, that it gathered together all the
remaining elements of our Spiritual System, so that “nothing was
lost,”—and saved for posterity the grandest fabric of Faith and Truth
among the nations of Christendom?—

But a darker alternative is possible—may Providence guide and protect
your Lordship, that so it may be averted!—A nation finally unchurched;—a
Bible keenly “criticised,” and unauthorized;—a Clergy descending to “use”
a Prayer-book which they will not affirm that they BELIEVE; a People
mainly divided between illiterate fanaticism and cold infidelity.

                              I am, my Lord,

                                         Your Lordship’s faithful servant,
                                                         WILLIAM J. IRONS.




FOOTNOTES.


{3}  See Mr. Oakeley’s Pamphlet with that title.

{4a}  In the original printing these sub-headings are side-notes.  They
have been turned to headings (and in a few cases paragraphs split) in
order to make the text more readable.—DP.

{4b}  See his Lordship’s Speech in the House of Lords, May 19.

{7}  The term “High Churchmen” is, of course, quite ambiguous:—“At the
_instance_ of High Churchmen,” p. 33.—Yet the learned Editor of Beveridge
records that prelate’s “staunch opposition to Comprehension.”

{18}  Dr. Cardwell, with his great carefulness (_Synod_, i. 7), even says
of the Forty-two Articles, “It was certainly enjoined that they should be
_subscribed_ generally by the clergy throughout the kingdom, and this
design, carried probably to some extent into execution, was only
prevented from being fully accomplished by the death of King Edward, July
6, 1553.”

{24}  An intelligent Wesleyan was recently urged by a friend of mine to
return to the Church, and solemnly replied, “_Never_, till you have
Discipline.”  But the attracting of non-conformists to the Church is not
what Dr. STANLEY proposes to aim at by his plan to abolish Subscriptions.
Certainly they have not been attracted to Oxford during the last nine
years of non-subscription there.

{28}  In other places, it is not the “early” age at which (p. 52) we are
“trapped into it” which is complained of, but the maturer time of “Holy
Orders” and “Mastership” (pp. 29, 30)—which, then, is the grievance?

{32}  It is worse than his very exaggerated contradiction of the saying
in the Twenty-ninth Article, that certain words were St Augustine’s.  See
the reference in _Beveridge_.

{36}  Since writing this, I have heard that a protest of this kind has
actually been mooted at a meeting of clergy in this diocese.

{37}  It is not said _by whom_ now “disputed.”  The Sixth Article says
that _we_, without dispute, take the books of the New Testament as
_commonly_ received.  Dr. STANLEY does not seem aware of the distinction
between the “Canonical” and “Sacred” Books.  See the _Reformatio Legum_,
chap. vii.



