BEST-SELLER ***




                          Gene Stratton Porter
                              BEST-SELLER


                      Prepared by the staff of the
             Public Library of Fort Wayne and Allen County
                              April, 1953




                                Foreword


Although Gene Stratton Porter resided in this city only a few weeks in
1913, her life was closely associated with the Fort Wayne area. Born in
rural Wabash County and educated in Wabash, the noted Hoosier author
established residence successively in Geneva, Decatur, and Rome City.
She was intimately connected with Coldwater, Michigan, and Winchester,
Indiana; and her literary and social activities frequently brought her
to the Summit City, where she had close relatives, friends, and
admirers. The G. R. & I. Railroad linked together many of the
communities where she lived her formative years and was the chief mode
of transportation in her youth.

Gene Stratton Porter was neither a classicist, nor a naturalist, nor yet
a realist in literature. Some critics have denominated her writings
“opiates for the masses”; others characterized them as being of
“molasses sweetness”; still others found them too imaginary. Certainly a
best-seller in her day, she was a romanticist in the best Hoosier
tradition of George Barr McCutcheon, Meredith Nicholson, and David
Graham Phillips—those other best-sellers of that golden day of Indiana
authors. President William Lowe Bryan of Indiana University once
included her in a list of fourteen best-selling Indiana authors. In the
larger national field of literature, her place is with those other
contemporary best-sellers, Harold Bell Wright and Harold McGrath.

Gene Stratton Porter won wide popularity and a special place in the
hearts of her readers; no contemporary author was better loved or
acclaimed by the reading public. Fifty million readers of her own day
enshrined her in their affections; countless thousands of later
generations still read her volumes avidly and experience the same
pleasant and refreshing glow as did their grandparents, parents, uncles,
and aunts in the first quarter of this century. Although the
professional literary critics found no especial merit in her works, Mrs.
Porter was amply rewarded, both by royalties from the sale of her books
and the acclaim of a large segment of the reading public who found
inspiration and recreation in her words. Indeed, the financial returns
from her works were seldom surpassed in her day by other contemporary
authors.

To the citizens of Fort Wayne and northeastern Indiana, the name of Gene
Stratton Porter is as familiar as the names and deeds of local heroes
and leaders of the present and distant past. The boards and the staff of
the Public Library of Fort Wayne and Allen County are pleased to present
this brief resume of the life and work of the Hoosier author in response
to frequent inquiries about her.

It is hoped that this publication will stimulate reminiscences among
Mrs. Porter’s friends and acquaintances and reacquaint her large retinue
of readers, both young and old, with their beloved author.


Geneva Stratton, later better known as Gene Stratton Porter, the
youngest of twelve children, was born on Hopewell Farm about ten miles
from Wabash, Indiana, August 17, 1863. Her father, Mark Stratton, was a
farmer and ordained minister and had lived in Wabash County since about
1834. Mr. Stratton was a high-principled man with unusual mental powers
and some education. Mrs. Stratton also possessed abilities of high
quality.

To the end of her life, Mrs. Porter gave her father credit for her
literary success. He devoted much time to instructing her by precept and
by example. He found the time to give her and his other children that
which they lacked in formal education. One of his contributions was the
oft-enforced admonition to finish a task once it was started. He taught
her economies which she practiced all of her life; many years later she
remarked that her instruction in thrift at home as a child prevented her
use of the telegraph later when she could well have afforded it.

Geneva Stratton had little schooling in any formal sense of the word.
Her father’s knowledge of history, literature, and the Scriptures was
monumental. He had read the great English and American historians of the
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries; he knew much of their
writings by rote. He could recite from memory most of the Bible with
references as to the source of his quotations. He transmitted not only
this knowledge and the wisdom based upon it to the child but imbued her
with a zeal to teach herself; this she did. Always a woman of firm
convictions, she usually had sound information to support her views.

Mark Stratton was a fervent abolitionist and assisted in the escape of
fugitive slaves for several years before Geneva’s birth; a secret tunnel
on his Wabash farm served as one of the stations of the famed
underground railroad. The family was a strong supporter of the Union
cause and stoutly adhered to the newly-organized and dominant Republican
party. This partisan influence infiltrated the life of Geneva so
strongly that when Grover Cleveland, a Democrat, was elected president
in 1884, the young non-voting Geneva (for women did not then vote) felt
that disaster indeed had come to her country.

After the death of his wife, Mark Stratton, too old for farm work, moved
with his family to Wabash, where he believed his children would have
better educational facilities. Geneva was eleven years old at the time.

During her school days in Wabash, Geneva began to develop an interest in
writing. Strongly rejecting any and all pressures to write on subjects
of no interest to her, she did write convincingly and interestingly on
topics vital to her. She sometimes neglected her arithmetic for writing.
There is no evidence that she, at this time, believed there was any
commercial value for the product of her pen. But she did change her
given name from Geneva to Genevé, and was called Gene by her family and
friends thereafter.

Gene was now becoming familiar with Sylvan Lake near Rome City; at
twenty-one, she had visited it three times. This was where she later
wrote many of her books. Genevé, always interested in the natural
wonders of the rather primitive woodlands of that day, now became
interested in fishing and water sports. For the remainder of her life
she liked to fish.

At Sylvan Lake she met a Geneva druggist, Charles Darwin Porter. Their
acquaintance developed into a romance, and they were married in 1886.
For a year they lived near the Court House in Decatur; thereafter they
took up residence in the village of Geneva.

The new Mrs. Porter assumed the duties of a housewife just the same as
any other American girl who married and settled down. As her husband’s
business grew and prospered, he became interested in the local bank and
served as its presiding officer and cashier. The money he invested in
land, which eventually produced oil, augmented his income considerably.

Together, after a visit to the exposition in 1893, they designed a home
of fourteen rooms modeled after Forester’s Building at the Chicago
World’s Fair. Known as Limberlost Cabin, it was their home for
twenty-six years.

A fire which destroyed a great deal of property in Geneva served to
demonstrate Mrs. Porter’s capacity for leadership. She ran to the scene,
quickly took command of those willing to assist her, formed a bucket
brigade (for there was no fire-fighting equipment), and directed her
neighbors in their efforts to quench the flames. In the process, she
became seriously burned.

Mrs. Porter, whatever her innermost strivings, gave no serious attention
to writing for many years. Her interest in photography, however,
developed after her family gave her a small camera for a Christmas
present. She became so skilled that one manufacturer of photographic
print paper asked her about the methods she employed with his product to
attain such excellent results.

Aside from husband, home, and family, Mrs. Porter’s life interest seems
to have been that great reservoir of natural wonders, _viz._, the
Limberlost Swamp immediately south of Geneva. The swamp, where a man
named Limber became lost and was never found, was said to serve as a
refuge for evil persons. This heavily-forested, water-soaked, primitive
region harbored wildlife of great variety in its dark and treacherous
bogs.

Mrs. Porter became interested in the bird life of the bogs and developed
a skillful technique of photographing it. She was happiest clad in hip
boots and knickers, exploring the swamps of the Limberlost. In her home
she kept innumerable specimens of swamp life. Love birds, canaries, and
parrots were likewise her companions. At first she was lured by birds,
but flowers and insects soon thrust themselves upon her.

When her only child, Jeanette, entered school, Mrs. Porter found time to
practice writing in secret. She submitted some of her nature pictures to
RECREATION, and was soon a staff member of the magazine. Her first check
for sixteen dollars was spent for photographic equipment, as were her
later earnings; in two years she had invested about fifteen hundred
dollars.

At this time, she switched from RECREATION to OUTING and wrote under the
tutelage of Caspar Whitney, editor of OUTING. One of the short stories
she wrote under his direction was published in METROPOLITAN, then a
leading national publication. Meanwhile she continued her researches in
nature in the Limberlost.

Mrs. Porter’s love for wild creatures influenced her strongly against
the ruthless tactics of hunters and plunderers. One winter day, during a
trip to the woods to feed the birds, she discovered the broken and
frozen body of a cardinal lying in the road, left by the hunter who had
slain it in target practice. “Song of the Cardinal,” a short story
inspired by the incident, was submitted to CENTURY. The editor replied
that he liked the story but would urge her to expand it into a
full-length novel, which she did in a month of intensive work. Original
illustrations depicting the life of the birds portrayed in the story
accompanied the book, which met immediate approval when it came off the
press in 1905. It also met acceptance in other lands, and during its
vogue, was published in seven languages.

SONG OF THE CARDINAL, her first large-scale publishing success, began
the controversy over the authenticity of Mrs. Porter’s natural history.
Some critics disputed the nature facts set forth in the book. Although
characters were sometimes composites, all of Mrs. Porter’s books and
stories were autobiographical and were based upon true incidents. This
fidelity to life contributed toward the success of her efforts.

FRECKLES, one of her best-known works, had its beginning when Mrs.
Porter saw a beautiful black vulture feather fall from the sky.
Accompanied by her husband, she traced it to a nearby nest in a hollow
log in the swamp and began the very disagreeable task of surveying the
scene. However, perseverance and disregard for the presence of the
foul-smelling carrion on which the vulture fed, enabled them to observe
and photograph the nesting of these creatures through the incubation
period to the final emergence of the young from the shell. The book
intertwined this episode with the life of a Scotch logger, a great deal
of wood lore, and the epochal character of Freckles. It was published
amid great acclaim in 1904, and during the next ten years, sold 670,733
copies. Eventually sales reached more than a million copies in America
and five hundred thousand in Great Britain.

The popularity of FRECKLES was so great that Mrs. Porter published a
sequel to it in 1909, GIRL OF THE LIMBERLOST. This work, illustrated by
one hundred pictures, gave her world fame. Again, nature lore
supplements the story in a most unique fashion.

LADIES’ HOME JOURNAL accepted articles on birds in 1904 and 1905, for by
this time Mrs. Porter was an accepted writer for the masses. Her novels
included a great deal of nature lore. This proved rather unpalatable to
some at first, but eventually was accepted as Mrs. Porter’s way. This
was the period of deep and abiding interest in nature writings
stimulated by Theodore Roosevelt, John Muir, John Burroughs, Ernest
Seton Thompson, and Luther Burbank. Their works, together with the new
interest in the conservation of natural resources, gave the literature
of nature a continuing impetus. Mrs. Porter’s writing was a thread in
this substantial pattern.

AT THE FOOT OF THE RAINBOW, issued in 1909, had a balanced ration of
nature lore and romance. BIRDS OF THE BIBLE, also published in 1909, was
a very scholarly work and required a great deal of research. It was by
no means decisively popular, but is interesting and replete with
illustrations—some of which were collected abroad with painstaking care.

About this time Mrs. Porter was employed as a contributor to
INTERNATIONAL BIBLE ENCYCLOPEDIA. For four years, she also served as
specialist in natural history and photography on PHOTOGRAPHIC TIMES
ANNUAL.

While making photographs of birds in the spring of 1910, Mrs. Porter
became interested in their music, calls, and sounds; the result was
MUSIC OF THE WILD. She dedicated this book to her husband’s brother, Dr.
Miles Porter, then a physician in Fort Wayne.

Mrs. Porter also collected moth specimens and eggs and brought them home
for study. She sometimes placed eggs on her pillow so that she might be
wakened by the sound of the moths breaking from the cocoon. Besides
making photographs of their egg-laying and other activities during their
short lives, she painted water colors of them. Her easel was made for
her by her father when she was a child. MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST,
published in 1912, grew from these labors and studies.

Mrs. Porter’s public, now a definite segment of the reading population,
awaited the coming of each new book with the Gene Stratton Porter
signature. In 1911, she published HARVESTER, which became her most
popular book. LADDIE, another very popular novel, was published in 1913.

By this time Mrs. Porter alternated each serious book of nature with a
romantic novel liberally sprinkled with nature facts and lore. During
her residence at Geneva, she wrote five novels and five nature books and
adopted the practice of publishing a book on her birthday.

Agricultural interests began dredging the Limberlost region after 1913,
and its virgin beauty was soon transformed into a lush pattern of
onions, celery, and sugar beets. Oil wells, frequently-traveled roads,
and modern fences left no place for birds and moths and temporarily
ended Mrs. Porter’s research in nature. Her thoughts turned to her
childhood at Sylvan Lake, so she purchased one hundred fifty acres of
virgin timberland at its edge, named it Wildflower Woods, and built a
cabin named Limberlost in memory of the first cabin at Geneva. One of
the outstanding features in her new home was a fireplace which contained
stones from every state in the Union. The kitchen was regarded as a
showplace by the people of the community; large and well-furnished, it
was used as a model and an object lesson for groups of women interested
in homemaking and home economics.

Her remarkable garden contained more than three thousand varieties of
plants. She employed a tree surgeon to repair damage to old and valuable
trees and improved the property near Rome City in other ways. She also
went to unusual lengths to preserve the bird life against destruction
and was particularly interested in perpetuating a colony of horned owls.

During her residence there she cataloged more than twenty-three thousand
flowers and plants and published four books: MICHAEL O’HALLORAN (1915),
MORNING FACE (1916), DAUGHTER OF THE LAND (1918), and HOMING WITH THE
BIRDS (1919). Because of a paper shortage the publisher asked Mrs.
Porter to cut MICHAEL O’HALLORAN one hundred pages after it was
practically completed. This she did, and still met the deadline.

At the outbreak of World War I, Mrs. Porter was engaged in the revision
and enlargement of WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS. Although she attempted
to do whatever war work met her hands, she managed to complete the
revision, FRIENDS IN FEATHER, in 1917.

In 1922 and 1923, Mrs. Porter wrote editorials for McCALL’S. Although
this was a new experience, her work was regarded as very successful.

Her first book of poetry, FIRE BIRD, was published in 1922. This was a
definite attempt to meet the requirements of the literary critics with a
work of top literary quality. Its reception, however, was disappointing;
as poetry, it failed to communicate itself to its readers. “Euphorbia,”
another poem, which ran as a serial in GOOD HOUSEKEEPING, was never
published in book form and immediately passed into the realm of the
forgotten.

Throughout her career Mrs. Porter disciplined herself to a definite
amount of time for work each day; from this regimen, she was unwilling
to be diverted. Although neighbors and acquaintances sometimes refused
to understand, the author persisted in her schedule. At times Mrs.
Porter also placed restrictions on invasion of her privacy at Sylvan
Lake. She remarked that her property rights were not respected and that
as an example, on one occasion, thoughtless fishermen dug angle-worms in
her carefully cultivated gentia bed.

For reasons of health, Mrs. Porter decided in 1922 to make her home
permanently in California, where she had been wintering for several
years. Since royalties from the purchases of fifty million readers were
pouring into her purse, and she could buy almost anything she wanted,
she planned to build two houses in California; one was at Bel-Air, near
Los Angeles, and the other was at Avalon. The work on these began in
1923. Here she wrote MAGIC GARDEN and KEEPER OF THE BEES.

Turning her attention to the possibility of screening her stories, she
organized Gene Stratton Porter, Inc., a Delaware corporation, to produce
motion pictures of her novels. She was assisted by her daughter and
son-in-law, Mr. and Mrs. James Meehan, and Mr. Meehan became her
director. Some attempt was made to deflect these screen stories toward a
sensational love interest both untoward and foreign to the original
story. Mrs. Porter protested stoutly, so the stories were screened with
great fidelity to the original text.

Mrs. Porter’s health throughout life was unusually good. However, at one
time, she received serious injuries in a fall; later she submitted to
four severe surgical operations on her jaws and facial bones because of
impacted teeth. In 1923, Gene Stratton Porter, while driving her car in
Los Angeles, became involved in a collision with a city streetcar and
was killed instantly.

For many years, some of Mrs. Porter’s works have been required reading
for pupils in the English classes of the Fort Wayne high schools, which
has reinforced the demand for these titles. Inquiry into the holdings of
this Library reveals that at present (1953), there are 650 active copies
of Mrs. Porter’s titles. In all, this Library has purchased, during the
last half-century, 2,580 of her books. Of these FRECKLES is the most
widely read; 353 copies have been worn out and 119 copies are still
active. GIRL OF THE LIMBERLOST ranks second with 377 worn out and 90
still available.

Perhaps the greatest achievement of Mrs. Porter and her books was to
induce people to wander in the out-of-doors and investigate nature. Her
considerable ability as a story-teller enabled her to hold and influence
her readers.

A boulder, known as Elephant Rock, lay in the St. Mary’s River a few
miles north of Decatur and is probably the largest of its kind in the
state. Youths called themselves skaters only when they could reach
Elephant Rock and return. Since Mrs. Porter wished such a rock as a
monument when she died, the school children of Adams County accordingly
placed it across the street from the old Porter homestead.

The State of Indiana has now taken over both the home at Rome City and
the one in Geneva as state memorials. When she moved to California, she
offered all her Sylvan Lake property to the State of Indiana on the
condition that she be reimbursed for the cost of the buildings and the
expense of the garden, but the State was not prepared to act on the
proposal at that time.

Mrs. Jeanette Meehan, daughter of Mrs. Porter, has written two books—a
biography of her mother, LADY OF THE LIMBERLOST, and a novel, FRECKLES
COMES HOME. In 1927, Mr. Meehan, in his capacity as director of films
for Gene Stratton Porter Inc., came to Sylvan Lake with a group of
thirty-five persons to film HARVESTER.

Besides her daughter and four grandchildren, Mrs. Porter was related to
other persons in and near Fort Wayne. Mrs. John Heller of Decatur was a
cousin; Merlin Wilson of Fort Wayne was a nephew; two sisters, Mrs.
Florence S. Compton and Mrs. Ada Wilson, were residents of Fort Wayne
for many years.




  Holdings of Titles by GENE STRATTON PORTER in the Public Library of
                      Fort Wayne and Allen County


                                                       Total  Active

  AT THE FOOT OF THE RAINBOW                             144      13
  DAUGHTER OF THE LAND                                   172      29
  FIRE BIRD                                                3       3
  FRECKLES                                               472     119
  GIRL OF THE LIMBERLOST                                 467      90
  HARVESTER                                              227      43
  HER FATHER’S DAUGHTER                                  177      35
  HOMING WITH THE BIRDS                                   12       7
  KEEPER OF THE BEES                                     135      40
  LADDIE                                                 260      78
  MAGIC GARDEN                                           133      60
  MICHAEL O’HALLORAN                                     180      51
  MOTHS OF THE LIMBERLOST                                  7       5
  MUSIC OF THE WILD                                        3       3
  SONG OF THE CARDINAL                                    65      31
  TALES YOU WON’T BELIEVE                                  5       4
  WHAT I HAVE DONE WITH BIRDS                              4       2
  WHITE FLAG                                             114      37
  Total                                                 2580     650




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.


