



                        The Alien Dies At Dawn

                          By Alexander Blade

               Kendall Stone had twelve hours to save a
            thousand lives. It wasn't much time, especially
            since someone was making sure he didn't use it!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
              Imagination Stories of Science and Fantasy
                             December 1956
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


There was a scream of tortured air over the Mojave Spaceport as a
two-man starship dropped on its hot jets toward the wide cementalloy
landing field. It slowed and settled gently to the ground. Before the
faint wisps of smoke had time to dissipate, the airlock door opened,
and a big, broad-shouldered man got out. He dropped lithely to the
ground and started off across the field at a quick trot.

He nearly bowled over a field attendant who had been coming toward him.
"Hey!" the surprised attendant said. "Don't you want your ship checked?"

"Don't have time," Kendall Stone called back, as he continued running
toward the Customs Office. He glanced at his watch. 1800. Twelve hours
till dawn. Twelve hours!

Kendall Stone gritted his teeth and doubled his pace. He was in a
super-plus top-level hurry. He'd practically burned a hole in the
vacuum between Earth and Mars trying to get to Mojave on time. _Twelve
hours!_ At dawn, Galth of Rastol would die in the execution chamber for
the crime of murder. And it was up to Kendall Stone to stop it.

He opened the door to the Main Lounge of the spaceport building and
pushed his way through the thick, jostling crowd, moving slowly toward
the Customs Office. He hardly noticed the people he shoved aside. There
was only one thought in his mind: _I've only got twelve hours_.

Personally, Stone didn't give an octangle damn about Galth; he didn't
even know the Rastolian personally--had never heard of him until
a short time ago. But if Galth of Rastol died, so would a thousand
others. The human colony on Rastol III would be wiped out in reprisal.

Including, Stone thought bitterly, the wife and two sons he had left
behind to go on this purchasing trip.

The Customs Office was in sight now. He threaded his way through the
mob. Just before he reached the door, he was almost pushed off balance
by a squat, chubby little man who steadied him, apologized profusely,
and went on his way.

Scowling angrily, Stone stepped inside the Customs Office. A hard-faced
man in uniform sat behind the broad desk, looking up at him boredly.

"Yes?"

"I have a cargo of Martian _valdone_ aboard my ship, and I want to
report it," Stone said.

The official nodded. "Do you have the import permission papers?"

Kendall shook his head. "I don't intend to import the stuff to Earth;
I'm just stopping over here until I can get some very important
business cleared up. But _valdone_ is a dangerous drug, and I simply
wanted to report the fact that I have a hundred kilograms of it aboard
my ship."

"I see," said the official, making a note on a minipad. "We'll have to
put a seal on the ship until you are ready to take off again."

"That's perfectly all right," Kendall agreed. Anything would have
been all right, as long as it didn't take much of the precious time
remaining before dawn.

The official extended his hand. "Your papers, please."

Kendall reached inside his jacket pocket for the small booklet of
identification papers. An icy shiver ran down his back.

The booklet was gone.

"What's the matter?" the official asked.

"My ID booklet is gone! I put it in my jacket just before I left the
ship; I must have lost it on my way over here."

"If that's the case, someone will return it," the Customs official
said. "It's of no use to anyone else. We'll send out a call for it.
Meanwhile, I'm afraid you'll have to remain inside the spaceport."

Kendall scowled. Of all the lousy time-wasting pieces of red-tape, he
thought. He felt trapped by bureaucracy. He didn't have time to waste
hanging around the spaceport tonight.

"We'll also ask for confirmation over the subradio," said the official.
"What is your home planet?"

"Rastol III, near Deneb."

"Very well. Even if we don't find your ID booklet, we can give you a
temporary pass if you are identified from Rastol by subradio."

Stone felt a cold trickle of perspiration forming on his forehead.
"That's going to take nearly twenty-four hours," he objected. "Isn't
there a faster way?"

The official shook his head and shrugged, the timeless gesture of all
bureaucrats. "I'm afraid not. Not unless we find your ID booklet."

       *       *       *       *       *

Like a caged tiger, Kendall Stone paced the administration area of the
spaceport for an hour, hoping doggedly that the ID booklet would turn
up somewhere out on the field. But an hour later, there was still no
sign of the booklet, and Stone felt himself growing desperate. The
glowing ball of Sol had already set behind the western horizon. Night
had fallen--the night whose end would bring the death of Galth of
Rastol and of a thousand innocent, unsuspecting colonists.

Stone stared at the polychrome hues of the sunset for a long minute,
clenched his fists, and made his decision; there was only one thing to
do.

He strolled quietly around the spaceport, looking for a way out.
There were none which were unguarded; Earth didn't like unwanted or
unauthorized colonists sneaking in on them.

Finally, he chose one of the smaller gates at random and walked up to
the guard. The sign over the gate said: OFFICIAL PERSONNEL ONLY.

Kendall walked straight up to the guard as though he had every right
in the galaxy to go through the gate. The man looked up at him
unsuspiciously, as though waiting for Stone to produce his ID booklet.

Kendall kept walking toward him, putting his hand inside his jacket
and fumbling around as though searching for the booklet. "Must be here
someplace," he murmured, as he came within earshot.

When he was within three feet of the unsuspecting guard, Stone
withdrew his hand and swung his fist in a hard, short arc which landed
crunchingly on the point of the guard's chin. The man staggered and
groped groggily for his gun.

"No you don't!" Stone said quietly. He sent another driving fist into
the guard's solar plexus, and the man folded up like an empty potato
sack.

Stone caught him before he hit the ground. "Sorry, pal," he whispered,
"but I've got work to do." He lowered the guard gently to the ground.

The sudden shrill blast of a whistle broke the twilight silence
somewhere to his left. Someone had seen the attack. Kendall didn't wait
for further discussion. He ran at top speed through the gate and into
the gathering darkness beyond.

Fifteen minutes later he was in Mojave City.

       *       *       *       *       *

The city, which had grown up around the spaceport, was a sprawling,
busy place. Stone headed straight into the heart of town.

He stopped in at the first store he met, and before the shopkeeper
could say anything, he burst out with, "I'm in a hurry, friend. Can you
tell me how to get to the Governor?"

The merchant, a small, pale man wearing a greasy apron, smiled and
said, "You won't be able to get to him easily, my good sir. You'll have
to see his Secretary. It's the way it's done."

"All right, where's his Secretary to be found?" Stone barked. He
received full directions on how to reach the Secretary's residence, and
snapped a "Thanks" and left.

It was a short trip by bus, but Stone decided to walk. Walking would
work off some of the nervous energy that was accumulating in him,
making him tense and keyed-up.

He reviewed the situation bitterly as he strode through the
brightly-lit streets.

The Rastolians were a peculiar race. They looked something like
reptiles walking on their hind feet, but they had warm blood and were
mammalian in several respects. The Government of Earth knew that much
about them.

What the Government didn't seem to know much about was the Rastolian
moral code. The Rastolians did not believe that any government had a
right to kill one of its citizens. Even murder could be punished only
by life imprisonment. Usually, though, a Rastolian convicted of murder
was simply given a gun with one shot in it and left alone in his cell.
Regardless of how despicable his crime may have been, no Rastolian was
so completely without honor that he would refuse to take the proper
steps to punish himself.

Galth of Rastol had been convicted and condemned. He had, the jury
found, murdered an Earthman in cold blood over a gambling dispute. But
if Earth sent him to the execution chamber, his fellow beings, outraged
over the injury and the insult to their way of life, would take steps
to avenge him. And that would be the end of the small colony of humans
on Rastol III.

Stone thought of his wife--who looked much too young to be the mother
of two children, who looked as fresh and desirable as she had the day
Stone had married her. She would perish with them. His sons; his home.
He shook his head bitterly. The tragedy could be averted if he could
reach the Governor's Secretary, if he could convince the Secretary that
there must be a stay of execution. The Government had to allow Galth
of Rastol the chance to kill himself in accordance with his people's
customs.

He glanced up at the street-sign. This was the street. It was a quiet,
residential block, lacking the fluorescent streetlamps of the business
district. He saw the house, and headed for it.

As he started up the long walk toward the house, two figures stepped
out of the shadows.

"Put up your hands, Mr. Stone," said the taller of the two. "The
Secretary wants to see you."

Stone frowned puzzledly, but made no resistance. He didn't care to
argue with a naked gun, and they were taking him where he was heading
anyway. He raised his hands and folded them behind his head, and let
them march him up the concrete pathway.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Secretary was a heavy-set, heavy-jowled man with a smile on his
lips and a calculating look in his eyes. He sat comfortably in an
overinflated pneumochair, smoking a cigar.

"Well, Mr. Stone," he said, eyeing Kendall coldly, "may I ask you why
you broke away from the spaceport? That is a serious offense, you know."

Stone moistened dry lips. "I know, Mr. Secretary, but it was an
emergency. I lost my ID booklet, and I had to get to see you before it
was too late."

The Secretary ignored that. "What is your business, Mr. Stone?" he
asked, narrowing his eyes penetratingly. "Why have you come from Rastol
III?"

"I came to pick up a hundred pounds of Martian _valdone_," Stone
explained. "We use it on Rastol III to make antivirotic drugs in
combination with extracts from Apler's Weed. The weed only grows on two
planets, Rastol III and Vescalor IX."

The Secretary grinned complacently, but did not say anything. Stone
began to sweat.

"While I was on Mars, I heard that the Rastolian native, Galth, was to
be executed, so I came here to ask the Governor to stay the execution."
He went on to explain in detail what would happen if Galth were to be
executed.

When he finished, he stared at the Secretary, searching the man's face
for some sign of interest. "Would you phone the Governor and tell him
what I've just told you?" he asked hoarsely.

"I'm afraid we can't do anything like that on the word of an
unidentified man, Mr. Stone," the Secretary said calmly. "As soon as
your identification comes through--"

"But that will be too late! Can't you see that this may mean the death
of thousands of innocent people?"

The Secretary held up his hand, palm out, for silence. "I'm sorry, Mr.
Stone. I can't take the unsubstantiated word of every crackpot that
comes in here." He reached over and turned on the visiphone. "I'm going
to have to call the police," he said. He looked over at the shorter of
the two men who had brought Stone in. "Miller, take Mr. Stone into the
other room and hold him until the police arrive."

The squat man took his gun out. "Let's go."

Kendall turned toward the man named Miller, and for the first time
saw his face clearly. In the darkness outside, he hadn't had a really
good look at the man, and since he'd been in the Secretary's study, he
hadn't paid any attention to the men who stood behind him. But as he
faced the pudgy little man, he realized that the face was definitely
familiar. He struggled to recall where he had seen the man before.

"In here, fellow," the squat man said, jostling Stone into what was
probably the library. Keeping the gun trained on him with one hand,
Miller lit a cigarette with the other, and a cloud of bluish smoke
curled upward.

Stone watched him. Suddenly, he remembered the face. The little man
was the same one who had bumped into him in the spaceport terminal,
just outside the Customs Room! He knew now what had happened to his ID
booklet. The fat little man was a pickpocket.

_And if he was working for the Secretary_--

Stone sucked in his breath sharply. This involved more than mere
ignorance about Rastolian customs; this was a conspiracy to wipe out
the colony of Earthmen up there!

He glanced at the clock on the wall. Not much time left. Overhead, he
heard the gentle whirring of a police helicopter. They weren't wasting
a moment in getting him clamped away where he couldn't do any harm.

He glanced up at the noise, and Miller automatically glanced up too.
Kendall's hand shot out, enclosing the squat man's gun hand in a
vice-like grip. Miller started to yell, but his antagonist's fist
smashed into his mouth before he could say anything. Miller dropped to
the floor.

Kendall picked up the gun, shoved it into his pocket, and threw the
little man easily over his shoulder. Then he headed for the French
windows that opened onto the balcony.

The police copter was landing on the roof as Kendall dropped from the
balcony and sprinted silently across the lawn. He ran to the garage,
opened the door to one of the Secretary's cars, and dumped Miller in
the back seat. It was but the work of a moment to short through the
starting switch. The hum of the turboelectric engine was completely
drowned out by the whirring of the copter blades above.

Without turning on the headlights, Kendall rolled the car out into the
street and drove toward an aircab stand. He was several blocks from the
Secretary's house before he turned on the headlights.

       *       *       *       *       *

He parked the Secretary's car in a darkened alley a block away from the
aircab office. As he drew back the handbrake, he heard Miller groan
faintly in the back.

"Quiet, friend," he said soothingly, and tapped him lightly on the head
with the butt of the gun. Rapidly he went through the fat little man's
pockets, tossing out cards of all different sorts before finding what
he was looking for. Sure enough, there was his ID booklet.

The picture was starting to take shape now, with everything falling
into place except the answer to the big question: _Why?_

Why was the Secretary so anxious to see Stone out of the way? What was
the whole business about? He didn't know.

He pocketed the ID booklet. It wouldn't help him now, not with the
police after him for breaking away from the spaceport, and maybe a
kidnapping charge on top of that.

Glancing at Miller to make sure he'd be out for a while to come, Stone
got out of the car and walked the block to the aircab office. It was
easy to rent one of them. All he had to do was show the bored clerk his
ID booklet, and sign for the cab.

"Remember," the clerk cautioned, "you can't take off inside the city
limits. You'll have to drive outside Mojave first."

"I know," Kendall said as he shoved the bills across the counter.
"Thanks."

He drove the aircar back to where he had left Miller in the Secretary's
car, and transferred the unconscious man to the rear seat of the
aircab. He looked around; no one in sight. _Good_, he thought. Then, in
direct violation of the law, he lifted the aircar and headed into the
night sky. The moon was bright overhead; the time was running short.

The Governor's palace was over a hundred and fifty miles away. Stone
figured he'd make it with very little time to spare. He set the
autopilot, and reached back with one big hand to pick up Miller by his
lapels.

"Wake up, Miller!"

The fat man shook his head groggily and opened one eye. He groaned.

Stone slapped him across the face, just hard enough to sting. "Come on,
damn you, wake up!"

"Lemme alone," Miller murmured. A sharp blow with an open hand brought
him to some attention. "Leggo."

Stone shook him until his head wobbled. "Get up and look alive. I want
to talk to you."

"I ain't sayin' nothin'," Miller said sullenly. "I don't know nothin',
and I can't tell you a thing."

A few seconds' quick persuasion and he had changed his mind. "All
right!" he yelled. "All right! I ain't got anything to lose, anyhow,
unless you want to get me for pickin' your pocket."

"I won't prosecute you if you talk," Kendall promised.

"Okay," Miller grunted. "You won't live to use the information anyway."
He sat up and rubbed his jaw. "The Secretary owns a lot of stock in
the colony that's making antivirotic drugs on Vescalor IX. He wanted
to put Rastol III out of commission so that the drugs would have to
be bought from Vescalor IX. So he framed this alien Galth and had him
sentenced to the execution chamber. He knew what would happen if the
Government executed a Rastolian."

Stone pounded his fist against the seat. "Don't the lives of a thousand
innocent people mean anything to him?"

"I never asked him, mister."

Stone started to lash out angrily at Miller, then pulled back the fist.
"Then Galth didn't kill the Earthman?"

"Nope. Penowski did. The tall guy who was with me in the Secretary's
place."

Kendall reached out one hand and clamped it tightly on the small man's
shoulder. Miller winced. "You're going to tell the Governor your
story," Stone said. "Every word."

Miller shook his head. "Oh, no. You can slap me around all you want,
but I ain't gonna get myself in hot water that way. No, sir, brother.
If the--LOOK OUT!"

Stone whirled and saw an aircar approaching, dropping down on his tail.
A white-hot beam flashed from it, blistering the paint on Stone's ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

Luckily, it was difficult for the other man to aim. The aircars were
flying at close to three hundred miles an hour.

He snapped off the switch of the autopilot and sent the little aircar
into a high, screaming climb. Another beam flashed by.

Kendall spun the ship into a back loop and barrel-rolled, bringing him
in on the tail of the other aircar. But the other driver was cagey; he
went into a hard right turn and tried to come up under Stone's vehicle.

Stone could see that the other aircraft definitely was not a
police craft. An official car would have externally-mounted,
automatically-controlled guns that would have shot Stone out of
the skies with the first blast. No; this was a highly unofficial,
extra-legal affair.

Another beam sizzled by so close that it gouged a spot out of the side
of the ship. Stone reached down, groping for the gun he'd taken from
Miller. It had been lying on the seat beside him, but it was gone now.
Stone cursed. It must have slid to the floor when he spun the ship
around.

"Never mind, Stone," Miller said coldly. "I got the gun now."

Kendall said nothing. He didn't even have time to curse. He was too
busy trying to avoid the white-hot blasts from the other aircar. He
sent the ship into a power dive and shoved in on the throttle. He
didn't know if the little car would take what he was going to give it,
but it was his only chance. If he survived--well, that was fine. If he
didn't, the last hope of the little colony was dead.

"You'll kill us!" yelled Miller. He put the gun against Kendall's neck.
"Stop it! You'll kill us!"

"Shut up and put that gun away, Miller," Stone snapped without moving
his head. "If you shoot me, we'll both die. This is the only way we can
keep your pals from murdering both of us."

Miller said nothing, but the cold pressure of the muzzle left Stone's
neck.

Suddenly, Kendall heaved back on the control wheel, pulling the aircar
out of its dive. He hung on grimly as the centrifugal force of the
pullout dragged the blood from his brain. Then he blacked out.

When consciousness returned, the sturdy little aircar was climbing
skyward. Stone glanced around. Miller was still unconscious, lying
slumped in a rotund heap down at the floor of the aircab. Stone hauled
him up, applied a hard punch to the jaw to make sure he'd stay that
way, and let him sag back down. Then he grabbed the gun from the
unconscious man's lap.

The other aircar was about half a mile away, heading toward him.
Evidently the other pilot had blacked out, too. Overhead the moon
glittered brightly. The night was wearing along. And when the sun's
rays trickled over the horizon--

Holding on to the wheel with his right hand, Kendall opened the window
a tiny bit and stuck his left hand out. The blast of air that tore past
almost ripped the gun from his hand.

He gripped it harder, until the knuckles whitened, and turned the ship
to face his assailant. A chill wind blew through the cabin. Sighting
the pistol by instinct alone, he squeezed the trigger.

The blue-white beam speared out, burning off part of the control
surfaces of the other car. It shuddered and spun, and then began to
spiral downward.

Kendall Stone closed the window, grasped the controls, and pointed the
aircar toward the Governor's palace.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Governor yawned sleepily as Kendall Stone finished his story. He
glanced at Miller, who was pinioned securely between two burly Security
Guards.

"Well?"

"It's true," the fat man said.

"Oh?" Stone asked. "Why the sudden nobility, Miller?"

"It's not nobility," Miller said. "They came after your ship knowing
I was in it--and that didn't keep them from shooting me down. Why
shouldn't I turn them in, if it'll save my own skin?"

"You should have known," Kendall said, "that people like those two
wouldn't hesitate to sacrifice you. They'd already planned to kill a
whole colony, you know."

The Governor, who had watched the whole interchange of conversation
rather impatiently, smiled grimly. "Mr. Stone, I think we all owe you
an apology. This has been a gross miscarriage of justice." He was wide
awake now. He turned to one of the guards.

"Fallon, get the Warden on the phone right away. Tell him the sentence
of death on Galth of Rastol has been commuted. Tell him that the real
murderer will be punished."

The guard returned a moment later.

"Well?" the Governor demanded.

"They were just leading him into the death cell when the message
arrived," the guard said. "They've returned him to confinement pending
the written pardon."

Kendall Stone sank down limply on a chair.

He glanced at his watch. 0545.

Outside the window, the first rays of dawn were breaking through the
murky night. He thought of his family awakening light years away. The
sun would be coming up too on Rastol....
